 

ALEXANDER HARKAVY
AND HIS

TRILINGUAL DICTIONARY
DOVID KATZ

Oxford Centre for Postgraduate Hebrew Studies and
St Antony’s College in the University of Oxford

For this language I live
—Alexander Harkavy

In 1925, the YIVO Institute for Jewish Research (Yidisher visnshaftlekher in-
stitut) was established in Vilna, on the initiative of Zelig-Hirsh Kalmanovitsh,
Zalmen Reyzen, Nokhem Shtif, Max Weinreich, and other twentieth-century
masters of Yiddish scholarship. Despite a paucity of resources, adverse political
conditions, and other obstacles, it immediately set into motion a new spirit of
creativity in Eastern Europe and internationally that centered upon the Yid-
dish language and Yiddish literature. The many scientific volumes in Yiddish
philology, folklore, and literary history published by the struggling new
institute won over Jewish and non-Jewish scholars alike to an exciting new
intellectual venture—the study of Yiddish. During World War II, the interna-
tional headquarters of YIVO was moved to New York City. Notwithstanding the
tragic deaths of most of its leaders at the hands of the Nazis and their collab-
orators, and the loss of its original home in the heartland of prewar Yiddish
speaking East European Jewry, YIVO in America, evolved from its American
Section, pressed onward. In addition to its three learned periodic journals,
YIVO, in the American years, has provided a number of indispensable reference
works in the field. Uriel Weinreich’s College Yiddish (1949 and numerous
revised reprints) facilitated the inclusion of courses in the Yiddish language in
the American university curriculum. In 1950, there appeared Nokhem
Stutschkoff’s Oytser fun der yidisher shprakh (Thesaurus of the Yiddish Lan-
guage), followed in 1968 by Uriel Weinreich’s Modern English-Yiddish Yiddish-
English Dictionary. Max Weinreich’s four-volume Geshikhte fun der yidisher
shprakh (History of the Yiddish Language) was published in 1973.

The late Gershon Harkavy (1904-84) of the Amalgamated Bank of New York generously provided
me with many of the Harkavy materials used in preparing this essay.

I am grateful to Miss Dina Abramowicz, Librarian of YIVO, and to her staff for kindly
providing photocopies of materials held in the YIVO library, and to Mr. Samuel Norich, Execu-
tive Director of YIVO, for offering valuable commentary on earlier drafts. Responsibility for
opinions and errors rests solely with the author.

 

 

 
