— vii —

The present volume is a reprint of Alexander Harkavy’s classic trilingual
Yidish-english-hebreisher verterbukh (Yiddish-English-Hebrew Dictionary).
By placing this work back in the hands of an impatient public, YIVO hopes to
continue to serve the reader, student, and scholar of Yiddish. At the same time,
this reissue of Harkavy’s dictionary focuses new attention upon the lifework of
America’s pioneer of Yiddish language and culture—a man who almost single-
handedly created an intellectual environment conducive to Yiddish in an assim-
ilation-prone society while masterminding Yiddish lexicography of the twen-
tieth century.

Alexander Harkavy (May 5, 1863—November 2, 1939) was born in the village of
Navar(e)dok (Nowogroédek), White Russia. His youth and the renowned Lithua-
nian Jewish family from which he hails are outlined in his own autobiographical
sketch (Harkavy 1935), written in a gracefully flowing Ashkenazic Hebrew. It is
supplemented by a family history by Tsvi Harkavy (1953, 27-55), which con-
tains further bibliography. The family was descended from the great Talmudist
and kabbalist Mordkhe Yafe (Mordechai Jaffe, ca. 1585-1612). It traces its
immediate dynastic prestige to Alexander’s great-grandfather Gershn, who
moved from Navaredok to Vilna where he became one of the pupils of the Vilner
goen (the Gaon of Vilna) before migrating to the kabbalist community of Safad in
northern Galilee, where he died around 1827. The name Harkavy is traced to
Gershn’s wife, Badane. According to family lore, she was called Harkavi from
the Polish term for “pronouncing a guttural 7,” which she did. Aristocratic
Polish visitors to the home used the term to refer to her with affection. Others,
fancifully perhaps, have traced the name to the Hebrew root meaning
“charioteering,” and a number of family members use the Hebraic spelling.

The Harkavys were one of the first families of Jewish intellectual life in
nineteenth-century Lite (the territory known as Lithuania from the Jewish
cultural perspective, which does not conform to any set of historical political
boundaries). They excelled in three spheres of Jewish cultural life: traditional
Talmudic learning, modern Jewish historical research, and the then-nascent
field of Yiddish research and publishing. The most luminous Harkavys are
direct descendants of founder Gershn. His son Aleksander-Ziskind was Nava-
redker rov (rabbi of Navaredok) in the early nineteenth century. His great-
grandson Dr. Avrom-Elyohu Harkavy, a pioneer in the field of Jewish inter-
linguistics, wrote an early study in Hebrew on the interrelationships between
Yiddish and Slavic (A.-E. Harkavy 1867). Another great-grandchild, Dvoyre
bas Reb Yoysef-Betsalel, became Dvoyre Romm after marrying into the first
family of Vilna Yiddish publishing. The Romms, who set up shop in 1799 and
continued running the firm until World War II, played an important role in the
rise of modern Yiddish literature.

Alexander was born to Gershn’s grandson Yoysef-Moyshe, a watchmaker and
Talmudist (not an unusual combination in a nineteenth-century Lithuanian
Jewish village), and his second wife, Freyde. Alexander recalls that his father
did not care about business, and were it not for the small weekly income derived

 

 

 

 

 
