 

— vill —

from the family home bequeathed by grandfather Aleksander-Ziskind, the
family would have starved. Alexander was eleven when his mother died at the
age of twenty-nine. His sixty-two-year-old father could not take care of the child
himself. Alexander moved in with his father’s uncle, Gershn ben Moyshe.

Alexander's childhood and early education followed the characteristic path of
nearly all of the modern giants of Yiddish culture. As a child in Navaredok, he
studied the Five Books and the Talmud and their commentaries in accordance
with Ashkenazic Jewish tradition; the Five Books along with the rest of the
Jewish Bible, according to Mendelssohn’s translation, with a semi-modern
teacher; Russian, German, arithmetic, and geography with a private teacher,
Yankev, son of his great-uncle and guardian Gershn; and Syriac on his own from
a Syriac grammar in German that he happened to come across in his great-
uncle’s library. A precocious youngster, Alexander produced two issues of a
handwritten Hebrew children’s magazine at age thirteen or fourteen. No fur-
ther issues appeared, because one of the village rich men whose Sabbath meal
for the poor was humorously lambasted in the journal rewarded the boy witha
smack for his efforts. He then began to write Hebrew poems and essays in the
flowery mlitse style of the period.

In the summer of 1878, fifteen-year-old Alexander Harkavy made the five-day
trek to Vilna to seek closer ties with the Vilna branch of the family, and new
vistas of literature and culture in the large city. His reception by his well-to-do
relatives, however, was not what he had hoped. Not wanting to spend all of his
worldly wealth—six gildn—on a hotel, he slept in the wagon that brought him to
Vilna and spent four months in a small synagogue in Vilna’s Yidishe gas (“Jewish
Street”). In late summer, he had a chance encounter with a woman relative. She
was not impressed by his plans to immerse himself in learning and research, and
offered to help him instead with something more practical. Alexander seized the
opportunity to bring himself closer to the scene of Jewish literature in Vilna by
suggesting typographical engraving as a career, and she arranged to have him
study the trade at Romm’s Vilna plant. He was taken on, however, as a polisher
of letters. Later, after letting a not insubstantial number of letters go unpol-
ished as a result of trying to read and work at once, he was made an accountant.
The episode gave him something to eat, a place to live, and a chance to resume
his studies of languages and literature in the usual random fashion of the young
autodidacts of that era. During his Vilna years, he dabbled in art and wrote
poems and essays in Russian, Yiddish, and Hebrew. In the bookkeeping depart-
ment, he made the acquaintance of such Vilna maskilim (Enlightenment propo-
nents) as Mordkhe Plungyan, Elyohu Shereshevski, and Ayzik-Meyer Dik.

Harkavy soon became restless again. His migration to a still larger city,
Warsaw, in the summer of 1881 proved to be short-lived. After a stint as a private
Hebrew teacher in Byalistok and an untriumphant return to Vilna, he joined one
of the youth groups who set out in 1882 to do collective farmwork in America. On
the stopover at Liverpool, England, Harkavy met up with another teenager—
Dovid Eydlshtat, who was to become one of the most beloved Yiddish poets in

 

 

 

 

 
