 

— ix --

New York City in the 1880s and 1890s. His ship from Liverpool, the British
Prince, landed in Philadelphia on May 30, 1882. After whirlwind sojourns in
Castle Garden and Greenpoint, Long Island, Harkavy found himself in Division
Street on New -York’s Lower East Side. He moved upstate to Pawling, in
Dutchess County, to take a job with another immigrant as a farmer. After a
month of milking cows, they both decided that farming was not for them after all
and hiked back down to the city. There Harkavy worked as a cleaner, a machine
operator in a matse factory, and at other odd jobs before landing a job with the
East Broadway bookseller Yerukhem-Tsvi Kantrovits, thanks to his Romm
family connections.

The story of Harkavy’s marriage abounds in a number of legendary variants.
They derive from his proposal of marriage to Bella Segalowsky just after she
had attempted suicide. She accepted, and they lived in idyllic harmony (see
Ravitsh 1980, 198). Her death in 1930 left him brokenhearted; he died a lonely
man in New York’s Broadway Central Hotel. The pictorial pamphlet he issued in
her memory (Harkavy 1934) is one of his last publications. The version of their
meeting that I heard as a child in New York from his cousin Gershon Harkavy, as
I remember it, has it that Harkavy strolled across the Brooklyn Bridge, saw a
young lady jump off, watched her rescue by a passing tugboat, followed her to
the hospital, and asked her, when she came to, why she had jumped. It was the
old story of the fiancé back in Europe writing to say that he was marrying
someone else. At which point Alexander said, “Nu, vosiz, mayn kind, Ikh’l mit
dir khasene hobn”—“So, what’s the matter, my child, 7701 marry you.”

Harkavy recalls in his Hebrew memoirs (1985, 7-8) that as a very young boy
he “felt a powerful love for the language of our people.” His documented career
in Yiddish starts in 1885, when he composed, while in Paris, “Sfas yehudis,” a
study in Hebrew of the Yiddish language. It drew swift praise from the French
Talmudist Israel Michel Rabbinowicz. Excerpts published later in both Hebrew
and Yiddish (Harkavy 1896; 1906), as well as his 1886 Yiddishist pamphlet in
Yiddish, are scientifically based responses to the opprobrium then being
heaped upon Yiddish. They are written in the spirit of Yehoyshue-Mordkhe
Lifshits’s classic defense of the language that had appeared in Alexander
Tsederboym’s Odessa journal Kol mevaser (Lifshits 1863). Both Lifshits’s and
Harkavy’s papers are pioneering documents in the social and political struggle
for the societal role of the language and the movement that later came to be
known as Yiddishism, rather than technical philological studies per se. Like
Lifshits before him in Russia, Harkavy in America went on to champion the
language as well as to document its treasures in dictionaries of major historical
importance. To understand the full impact of Harkavy as a founder of Yid-
dishism, it is important to bear in mind that his 1886 Yiddishist pamphlet
appeared at a time (preceding Y. L. Peretz’s literary debut) and in a place
(America) where a pamphlet on behalf of the Yiddish language was both intel-
lectually revolutionary and journalistically sensational.

 

 

 

 

 
