 

— Xj] —

grammars and handbooks to help immigrants adapt to American culture was
also the champion of Yiddish, who published lessons in English to help Amer-
ican-born Jews master Yiddish? Why did the most loyal of American Yiddishists
include Hebrew in a dictionary and continue writing in Hebrew as well? How
many others wrote pamphlets and articles in Hebrew seeking to enhance the
status of Yiddish? It is precisely his inner peace in loving, mastering, and
propagating the heterogeneous threads of language and knowledge in modern
American Jewish life that makes Alexander Harkavy one of the greatest immi-
grant Jews in American history. The immigrants had to learn English and
elements of general education to take advantage of the opportunities the New
World had to offer. At the same time, he felt, they could cultivate their own
language with pride, seriousness, and devotion. Further, it was possible to build
a Jewish life and literature in Yiddish while studying the ancient and modern
treasures of Hebrew. These counterbalances are no mean achievement in an era
characterized by bitter infighting, political squabbling, and ideological polar-
ization in the immigrant Jewish community.

In the last years of his life, Harkavy, by then the unchallenged American hero
of Yiddish language and culture, was acknowledged as a lexicographic grand
master by international Yiddish scholarship. The establishment of YIVO in
Vilna in 1925 had no small part to play in this belated but richly deserved
recognition. YIVO invited Harkavy to summarize progress on his manuscript of
his greatest lexicographic work, the “Yidisher folks-verterbukh” (“Yiddish
Folk Dictionary”), a Yiddish-Yiddish defining dictionary—which has still not
been published—in the first volume of its journal, Yivo bleter (Harkavy 1981).
The new institute for Yiddish scholarship also compiled a bibliography of his
major works on the occasion of his seventieth birthday (YIVO 1933) and pub-
lished a gracious tribute (YIVO 1934) on the same occasion in an issue of its
journal dedicated to Harkavy. In an instance of close cooperation between the
worlds of organized Yiddish scholarship, on the one hand, and culture and
literature on the other, YIVO joined with the New York Workmen’s Circle to
organize a banquet in honor of Harkavy’s seventieth birthday in May, 1933. Inits
message to the banquet, the Vilna YIVO credited Harkavy’s half-century of
work on behalf of Yiddish as having been instrumental in the creation of the
Institute. The many tributes to Harkavy on his death in 1939 were characterized
by that rare combination of awe and affection. He was credited for doing “more
than any other man for the general education and Americanization of Jewish
immigrants in the United States” (Richards 1940, 156) and for single-handedly
turning around the American Jewish attitude toward the Yiddish language
(Mark 1940, 162).

This dictionary has played a major bidirectional role over the last six decades
in helping to educate East European Jewish immigrants in English and their
children and grandchildren in Yiddish. It assumes an honored position in the
intellectual history of Yiddish studies from three perspectives: first, within the

 

 

 

 

 
