 

— xii —

history of Yiddish dictionaries; second, within the broader history of Yiddish
studies; and, finally, as an invaluable work of twentieth-century Yiddish schol-
arship for students of the language today.

Yiddish lexicography has its roots in medieval Europe, and it began with the
practice of introducing individual Yiddish “glosses” to translate obscure
Hebrew or Aramaic items at appropriate points in the margins of manuscripts.
These later evolved into separate lists alongside their Hebrew counterparts,
which became in effect, the first bilingual Yiddish dictionaries. With the advent
of Yiddish printing in the sixteenth century, a large number of dictionaries in
many lexicographic genres appeared (see Katz, in press). These include Bible
-concordances, such as Anshl’s Mirkeves hamishne, which appeared in Cracow
in 1534; Hebrew- Yiddish dictionaries in the classic Semitic mold of organizing
material according to roots rather than words, such as Shvab and Ben- Yankev’s
Seyfer meylits yoysher (1773); dictionaries according to semantic categories
(thesauruses) of which the most popular was probably the Khinekh kotn,
published in Cracow in 1640 and many times thereafter throughout Europe.
More specialized dictionaries appeared over the centuries to treat selected
portions of Yiddish vocabulary. Among the most prominent of these are Ben-
Gershn’s Seyfer sheymoys (1657) on names, Manesh’s list of Yiddish words
derived from Hebrew or Aramaic in his Mare haksav (ca. 1717) and the dictio-
nary of internationally used words in Shevreshin, Bendin, and Marsn, Seyfer
khanekh lanaar (1713).

Harkavy’s trilingual dictionary is the most outstanding instance of another
genre in the history of Yiddish lexicography, one that is over four hundred years
old—the multilingual dictionary comprising Yiddish, Hebrew, and one or more
coterritorial non-Jewish languages. Its founder was Elye Bokher (Elijah Lev-
ita), the great Hebrew grammarian and Yiddish poet of the sixteenth century,
best known for his poetic masterpiece Bovo d’Antona (1541; see Joffe 1949). His
Shmoys dvorim (1542) is a Yiddish-Hebrew-Latin-German dictionary, a precur-
sor of Harkavy’s dictionary. It was followed by, among others, Ben Yekusiel’s
Seyfer diber tov (1590), a Hebrew-Yiddish-Italian dictionary, and Nosn-Note
Hanover’s Seyfer sofe brure (1660), comprising Hebrew, Yiddish, Italian, and
Latin. A posthumously published edition (Hanover 1701) included French
as well.

Harkavy cannot be understood, however, solely from a historical perspective,
as a Yiddish lexicographer in a tradition deriving from the early history of Ash-
kenaz in medieval Europe. A major conceptual difference severs all the older
works on Yiddish from those written in the Yiddishist tradition of the nine-
teenth and twentieth centuries, namely, a new appreciation of the language as a
national Jewish language suited to the highest pursuits of literature, culture,
and the social sciences. And to understand Harkavy in the context of his
contemporaries, it is necessary first to trace the schools that preceded the rise
of the modern science of Yiddish. Few languages have been as extensively
explored as Yiddish by people driven by as many intellectual motives (see Katz

 

 

 

 
