 

 

— xiii —

1986). Humanist-inspired scholars of Hebrew and Aramaic in the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries looked upon Yiddish as a curiosity combining the familiar
Germanic with the exotic Semitic. One of them, Johann Boeschenstain, an
itinerant Hebrew teacher, tacked an advertisement onto the door of a Regens-
burg inn in 1518 offering to teach Yiddish in six days and for a reasonable fee. A
long tradition of “teach yourself Yiddish” handbooks for business people was
launched by Paul Helicz (1543); the most esoteric work in this tradition was Rei-
zenstein’s 1764 manual of Yiddish for horsedealers. Missionaries from the six-
teenth to the eighteenth centuries sought to propagate the study of Yiddish to
train other missionaries and to communicate with the targeted Jewish popula-
tion in its own language. It was a missionary, Johann Heinrich Callenberg, who
established the world’s first known university course in Yiddish in Halle in 1729.
Criminologists wrote about Yiddish as a key to the German underworld lan-
guage, which had borrowed thousands of words from both Hebrew and Yiddish.

While many of the hundreds of books and pieces on Yiddish written in these
and other contexts are of value today only as curiosities, some are of permanent
value to Yiddish scholarship. Their authors were both talented as descriptivists
and broadminded enough to transcend their initial motivations and develop a
profound scholarly dedication to Yiddish. Chrysander started out as a student
in Callenberg’s missionary-training program at Halle, but his 1750 grammar
exhibits a brilliant perspective on the structure and history of Yiddish. Carl
Wilhelm Friedrich wrote a masterly guide to the language for merchants and
travelers (1784) that contains the first known attempt at a classification of
Yiddish dialects. Avé-Lallemant, a German police chief who came to Yiddish via
underworld-language studies, became a staunch devotee of Yiddish for its own
sake; about half of his four-volume magnum opus (1858—1862), is dedicated to
Yiddish. By the late nineteenth century, Yiddish studies acquired tangential
status in comparative Germanic philology. Two Jews trained in comparative
philology, Lazar Saineanu (1889) and Alfred Landau (1896), examined Yiddish
from the scientific viewpoint of comparative Germanic philology and are identi-
fied with the academic school known to Yiddish scholars as the germanistn
(Germanists).

In the late nineteenth century, the first works were written presaging a new
field of Yiddish linguistics that would be conceptually centered upon the lan-
guage itself and methodologically enhanced by respect and affection for the
language. The new Yiddish philology, a self-contained universe of scholarly
disciplines (linguistics, folklore, bibliography, literary history, and more) was
proclaimed by Ber Borokhov (1913), who also envisioned a Yiddish academy
created for research and teaching of the language. Although he did not live to
see his dream come true, it was realized by his disciples in 1925 when YIVO was
organized (see Shtif 1925 and M. Weinreich 1925). Several years before, the
Yiddishist perspective on the language was outlined by Matisyohu Mieses
(1908) at the celebrated Tshernovits (Chernowitz) Language Conference, where
Yiddish was proclaimed a national Jewish language. Mieses and Borokhov

 

 

 

 
