 

— xiv —

erected the conceptual edifice for the new school of yidishistn. As Borokhov put
it, Yiddish philology was emerging as the scientific component of the social and
cultural movement on behalf of Yiddish.

Three personalities stand out as the late nineteenth-century precursors of
Mieses and Borokhov and of the scholarly achievements of Yiddish Studies in
the twentieth century. All loved Yiddish passionately and all—autodidacts in
linguistics—used the tools of linguistics to study the language. Philipp Mansch
in Lemberg, although he wrote his study (1888-1890) in German in line with the
germanistn, looked at each bit of Yiddish vocabulary, syntax, and phonology
not from the viewpoint of German or some other external structure, but
through the eyes of the analyzed language itself, in the spirit of the later
yidishistn. His study was declared lost by a number of scholars, but in 1984 it
was rediscovered in YIVO’s archives by Christopher Hutton. Thanks to this
discovery, it is now clear that Mansch’s study is the “missing link” between the
Germanist school that studies Yiddish as a Germanic language and the Yid-
dishist school for whom it is a self-contained branch of humanistic inquiry. The
other two founders of modern Yiddish philology were the lexicographers
Yehoyshue-Mordkhe Lifshits (1863; 1869) in Russia, who thoroughly docu-
mented his native Southeastern (popularly “Ukrainian”) Yiddish, and Alex-
ander Harkavy in America, who was the first to extensively document his native
Northeastern (popularly “Lithuanian”) Yiddish—the Yiddish spoken and writ-
ten in the United States, and, most significantly, the language of the new
literature and press that had blossomed by the turn of the century.

Harkavy’s work initially drew substantial criticism. Noyakh Prilutski (1917,
xiv), the grand master of Yiddish linguistics in Warsaw, reviewing the 1910
edition of Harkavy’s Yiddish-English Dictionary, criticized the use of far too
much daytshmerish—items taken from modern standard German, which often
displaced genuine older Yiddish words, and which were in wide use in the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries—while praising his wealth of dialec-
tological material. Max Weinreich (1923, 27), too, castigated him for Germaniza-
tion in his early bidirectional dictionaries, but noted (p. 241) that Harkavy had
promised in a 1922 article in New York’s Forverts to de-Germanize the spelling of
his forthcoming Yiddish-English-Hebrew Dictionary. Harkavy kept his word.
In a posthumously published paper, Max Weinreich (1971, 3) characterized
Harkavy as having “weak normativist aspirations by nature, and investing his
powers into the inventorization of his linguistic material.” Lively discussion was
also sparked by Harkavy’s liberal inclusion of Anglicisms that had made their
way into American Yiddish (see Niger 1941, 23). These two complaints—inclu-
sion of daytshmerish and of English-derived items then current in American
Yiddish speech—are the charges most frequently leveled against Harkavy’s
dictionaries.

Whether Harkavy was right or wrong to include masses of nineteenth-cen-
tury borrowings from German then current in the Yiddish press (and, in many
instances, in native Yiddish speech—then as well as now) depends on the

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
