 

linguistic theory to which one subscribes. The debate is between the
normativists (or prescriptivists) who believe in the active use of dictionaries
and grammars to “change the language,” and the descriptivists who believe that
the task of grammarians and lexicographers is simply to describe what they see
and hear. When his lifework is looked upon as a whole, Harkavy emerges as a
moderate who defies labels. He believed in a normalized Yiddish orthography
and grammar, but did not see it as the role of the dictionary compiler to
represent anything other than the empirically observable language of the day.
In the context of a journalistic format, he was more than willing to innovate. His
Yidisher progres in Baltimore in 1890 was in fact the first newspaper anywhere
with a reformed phonetic orthography approaching modern Yiddish spelling on
major points. Harkavy had previously written a series of articles advocating
orthographic reform (e.g. Harkavy 1888). It thus emerges that Harkavy the
descriptivist was also one of the earliest pioneers of modern Yiddish spelling,
later formulated scientifically by Ber Borokhov (19138, 18-22) and elaborated
upon by Zalmen Reyzen (1920, 102-62). It was not until 1920 that the Yiddish
literary world actually shed the written language of the nuisance of silent
letters introduced by mid-nineteenth-century editors who made it a practice to
copy modern standard German spelling right onto the Yiddish alphabet.
Harkavy, ever faithful to contemporary linguistic truth, used the Germanized
spelling he loathed in his pre-1920 dictionaries and the newly accepted Modern
Yiddish Spelling after that year.

A similar tale is revealed by an examination of the actual lexicon in his earlier
dictionaries as contrasted with this one. Most striking is the radical diminution
of daytshmerish in his Yiddish-Hebrew-English Dictionary, when compared
with his earlier bilingual Yiddish-English and English-Yiddish dictionaries.
Nearly all the nineteenth-century borrowings from German that appear in the
trilingual dictionary are items that took root in the language, are used in one or
more genres of modern Yiddish literature, and can be heard in the Yiddish of
native speakers. It is also possible that an analogous change of course underlies
the banishment of the greatest concentration of Anglicisms to the 1928 adden-
dum, keeping them segregated from the bulk of Yiddish vocabulary. These
modifications attest to changes that were in progress in the literary Yiddish of
the first quarter of the twentieth century.

This republication of Harkavy’s Yiddish-English-Hebrew Dictionary in no
way displaces Uriel Weinreich’s Modern English-Yiddish Yiddish-English Dic-
tionary (1968). In fact, the two complement each other. Weinreich’s is a master-
piece of modern scientific lexicography that has become an international
structural model for makers of other bilingual dictionaries. Its semantic struc-
turing reflects the author’s brilliant research in general linguistics. Its com-
prehensive analytical apparatus is tantamount to a Yiddish grammar com-
pressed into a lexicographic format. Moreover, Weinreich’s dictionary is bidirec-
tional; it will therefore remain the first dictionary for elementary students of

 

 

 

 
