 

— xviii —

East European Yiddish, Harkavy is strongest on his native Lithuanian Yiddish,
pinpointing, for example, [kh vel shikn nokh dir dem Broder shames “J will
send you a special messenger” as something he heard in his native Navaredok
“fifty years ago” (p. 541). Western Yiddish, the largely moribund but once
primary branch of Yiddish on German-speaking territory in Central Europe, is
represented in surprising force, often derived, with full accreditation from
Tirsch’s Handlexicon (1782). He labels khazer-bokher “private tutor” (from
khazern “to review [a lesson]” as “German Yiddish” (p. 226) and marks the use
of forshpil (literally “prelude” or “foreplay”) for “engagement, betrothal” as
“archaic in Austria” (p. 403); shander-bander, a kapore far eynander “one is as
bad as the other” (p. 485) is likewise attributed to Austria. Eastern Yiddish
yidishn “circumcise” (literally “make Jewish”) is contrasted with Western
Yiddish yidshn, which Harkavy remarks is pronounced yitshn (p. 254). The
numerous Western items cited include piltsl “girl” (p. 368); plankhenen “cry”
(p. 371); shkedele “little box” (p. 518); and tsaverle “necktie,” from tsaver “neck”
(p. 416).

One of the best-known qualities of the dictionary is its author’s folksiness and
humility, so rarely found among “professional” scholars. He says of shalotn
shames “errand-goer, messenger of a town” that he could not work out the
meaning of shalotn and defines via context (p. 484). At shmokhn “rejoice, be
radiant with joy” (pp. 507-8), he remarks that “the etymology of the word is
unknown to me. The meaning I give according to the context” (see Korman 1954,
56-57, Mark 1954, 60). One even comes across “Ayzik Meyer Dik [the Yiddish
novelist] says somewhere” (p. 119).

Harkavy is often castigated for including gender markers for nouns only in
the first two pages of the trilingual dictionary. It is the kind of inconsistency
that only a lexicographer and folksmentsh of his stature could carry off. In his
preface, he explains, with his usual down-to-earth honesty, that he could not
proceed without being arbitrary and capricious. It is evident, however, from the
introduction to the unpublished Yiddish- Yiddish defining dictionary (Harkavy
1931, 290) that he and mainstream Yiddish stylistics were then moving in the
same direction. In his unpublished work, the gender problem is remedied in a
novel way by offering the user a dual system—either the generally accepted
three-gender system of Southern Eastern Yiddish (Mideastern Yiddish, popu-
larly “Polish,” plus Southeastern Yiddish, popularly “Ukrainian”), relying upon
Lifshits (1869), Birnbaum (1918), and Reyzen (1924); or his native two-gender
Northeastern Yiddish (popularly “Lithuanian”) system, for the speakers of
that dialect.

After completing the Yiddish-English-Hebrew Dictionary, Harkavy con-
tinued to work on his massive fifty-thousand-word Yiddish-Yiddish defining
dictionary. Unlike his previous bilingual and trilingual dictionaries, the
Yidisher folks-verterbukh, as it was to be called, was envisaged as “a dictionary
of Yiddish and for Yiddish. National dictionaries have long been in existence
among cultured nations. Now that Yiddish has come to play a self-sufficient

 

 

 

 

 
