 

GUIDELINES

XXXViii

6. Style and Usage Levels

bol ». These words often carry a con-
notation of traditional Jewish learning.

3. Yid. words whose use is largely
restricted to North America are identi-
fied by the marker -vx. Regionalisms of
this type are sometimes avoided in
cultivated style even within North
America.

0. Admissibility in Standard Yiddish

1. Where variants are current in
Standard Yiddish, one form is analyzed
in full in YE, while the others are
provided with cross-references to the
analyzed form. The cross-reference
symbol is » (see). This treatment is
merely a means of economizing space
and does not necessarily imply a
preference for the analyzed form. In
EY only one variant is usually listed.
(See Author's Preface, p. vii.)

2. Words which a reader may en-
counter in certain Yid. texts, especially
of older date, but which are regarded
as inadmissible in Standard Yiddish by
the great majority of stylists, are iden-
tified in YE by the symbol *. (By
and large these are words of literary
German origin which were current in
written Yid. in the late 19th and early
20th centuries.) Instead of being ana-
lyzed and translated, these words are
cross-referenced to admissible Stand-
ard Yid. equivalents. In EY such
forms, being of no use to the learner,
are omitted.

3. Words and variants which are
generally avoided by the most careful
stylists, but on whose admissibility in

 

a. Stylistic Qualifiers

1. Yid. words and phrases which are
humorous in their connotation are
identified by the label ‘‘(hum.),”’ espe-
cially if the tone of the item in question
is not self-evident from the Eng
equivalent.

2. Yid. words and phrases which are
ironical in their connotation are simi-
larly identified by the label ‘‘(zro.).”’

Yid. words and phrases which are
contemptuous in their connotation are
identified by the label “‘(cont.)”’.

3. Yid. words and phrases corre-
sponding to figurative submeanings of
Eng. items are identified by the
marker ‘‘(fig.).””

4. Yid. words and phrases which are
normally restricted in application to
things, concepts, or activities belonging
to Jewish culture are identified by the
marker ‘‘(/Jew.)."’ For example, under
bury in EY, three verbs are listed
which can refer freely to burials in any
culture, and one verbal phrase which
is properly applicable only to Jewish
burials.

b. Usage Levels

1, Yid. words and phrases which are
strictly colloquial in their flavor, and
which would ordinarily be out of place
in serious written prose, are identified
by the symbol °.

2. Yid. words which are distinctly
literary in flavor, and which would
ordinarily be out of place in a col-
loquial style, are marked by the sym-

 

 

 
