 

GUIDELINES

and ‘medallion’, respectively. From a
different point of view forms like
‏;טי'שעלע‎ ybyp'yp may be analyzed as
the diminutives of buy, bayp.

FEMININE DERIVATIVES

18. Much more often than is the
case in Eng., Yid. nouns require special
derived forms for referring to females.
Thus syny> refers to a male teacher,
or to one of unspecified sex; for a
female teacher, a derived form—
payt'yd or ypryn'ys—must be used.

19. Where the feminine noun is
formed from the corresponding mascu-
line by the addition of a productive
suffix, the feminine form is not listed
in EY; consult the appropriate entry
in YE.

20. Nouns forming derived femi-
nines by addition of the suffix }’ are
identified by the symbol ‏יה‎ 1

Russian © (j) won

This YE entry means that the corre-
sponding feminine 158 ‏.ד רוסין‎

21. Other feminine suffixes are iden-
tified after the symbol oO. Ex.:

שנײַדער יי (ס) םקע 4210

This signifies that the feminine of
‏.שנײַ'דערקע 18 שנײַדער‎

In a few cases, feminine derivatives
involving stem changes are listed after
the symbol O. Ex.:

פּוסטעפּאַסניק יער (עס) ם-ניצע 1016 ,ז10216
פֿױליאַ'ק ‎lazy man ypwux-O (py) w‏

This signifies that the feminine of
‏פּוסטעפּאַ'סניצע 18 פּוסטעפּאַסניק‎ 404 6
‏פֿױליאַטשקע 15 פֿױליאַ'ק 04 12106מס}‎ .

 

XXVill

dictable from the base noun, have
further meanings best rendered in Eng.
by different equivalents. Such di-
minutives are treated in this Dictionary
as separate entries. In YE only the
“unpredictable” meaning is separately
identified. Ex.:

handle (A wn) (Fy) ‏הענטל זאָס‎

The notation (A uign) means that the
entry word, buiyn, is the diminutive of
vin. Therefore, apart from the listed
meaning ‘handle’, it also has the auto-
matically inferred meaning ‘little
hand’.

Most Yid. nouns denoting concrete
objects also form a different kind of
diminutives to denote still smaller ver-
sions of the same objects, or to refer
to the objects with a still greater
measure of endearment or disparage-
ment. Ex.: wy ‘table’, Sey ‘little
table’, ybyw'y ‘tiny table’; syp ‘head’,
bpyp ‘little head’, ybys'yp ‘tiny head’.
These diminutives, too, have neuter
gender. Since the process is productive
and the general pattern described
above with regard to the “first diminu-
tive’’ is adhered to, the “‘second di-
minutives’’ appear as separate entries
marked by the symbol AA only in the
few cases where they have additional
meanings best rendered in English by
specific equivalents. Ex.:

trick (AA upg) (7) on ybyn'yy
medallion (AA pryt) ‏הע'רצעלע אס (ך)‎

This is to say that in addition to the
meanings ‘tiny move’ and ‘tiny heart’
(automatically predictable from the
base nouns) these ‘‘second diminu-
tives” also have the meanings ‘trick’

 

 
