 

GUIDELINES XXVI1i

or disparagement. Since the process is
productive and the choice of suffix
(generally 5, but in some cases 57 or
b>), as well as the treatment of the
final stem consonants, are completely
regular, individual diminutives of
nouns are not separately listed in this
Dictionary.

15. In the case of some nouns, the
addition of the diminutive suffix is
accompanied by a change in the
stressed vowel of the stem. In such
cases the diminutive is listed in YE
after the symbol A. Ex.:

קאָפּ תי (קעפּ) 4 קעפּל ‎head‏

This means that the diminutive of syp
is bpyp. The diminutives in >. have
neuter gender.

16. A few nouns form diminutives
by means of different suffixes (e. g. yp).
These diminutives are also individually
listed in YE, after the symbol A. Their
gender as a rule is identical with that
of the noun in its base form. Ex.:

while ypowd'yn A (Dp) ‏װײַלע ד‎

This means that the gender of the
diminutive ypwwd'yn is the same as
that of ybyn. In the very few cases
where the gender of the diminutive
not ending in 9 differs from that of the
noun in its base form, it is listed in
YE after the symbol A. Ex.:

הויז זא (הײַזער) 4 הײַזל/ײ הײַזקע 56טסמ

This means that yprn is feminine; on
the other hand bryz, since it ends in 5,
has neuter gender in accordance with
the rule of §15 above.

17. Some Yid. diminutives, in addi
tion to the meaning which is pre

 

Similarly, (nv—) mvyo means that the
‏(--ות) 2060 ,מעשׂיות 15 מעשׂה 04 121ט1ק‎ Non
means that the plural of xon is mom

12. If the plural of a transcribed
word is formed through the addition
of an ending without changes in the
stem and without other orthographic
alterations, the plural form is not sepa-
rately transcribed. Thus,

[BOKhER] (0°) ‏בחור‎

is to be understood to mean that the
plural of [BoKhER] ‏בחור‎ 5

[BO’KhERIM] oO’ NNA

In all other cases, the plural form of
the noun is transcribed separately,
e.g. [SOYNE—SONIM] (0°) Nw; that is
to say, the singular is [soyNE] Nw and
the plural is [sonmm] oNnb.

DISCREPANCIES IN NUMBER

13. As a rule, Eng. singular and
plural nouns are matched, respectively,
by Yid. singulars and plurals. In the
rare cases of discrepancy, the symbols
“‘sg.,” ‘“‘pl.,” or their Yid. equivalents
‏אצ)‎ and ») are used to call attention to
the special relationship. Similarly, the
symbol ‘‘coll.,” or its Yid. equivalent
(we), is used to specify the collective
meaning of an Eng. or Yid. noun, as the
case may be. E. g. the Eng. plural arms
is matched ‏דאָס נעווע'ר של .314 עס‎ 2 001-
lective noun.

DIMINUTIVES

14. From most Yid. nouns denoting
concrete objects, diminutives may be
formed to denote smaller versions of
the same objects, or to refer to the
objects with a measure of endearment

 

 
