 

xxvi GUIDELINES

5. Grammatical Analysis of Yiddish Vocabulary*

replacement of the stem, the plural
form is listed in its entirety, e.g.
‏(קעפּ), װאַלד (װעלדער), פֿרמאַן‎ BNP
‏.ע1ז114ח51 . (פֿורלײַט)‎ (Mynx) TNS means
that the ‏צוואה 01 21זט1ק‎ is Myny.

7. If the plural involves the drop-
ping of an unstressed stem vowel, the
termination of the word is shown in
parentheses. Thus (dypw...) ‏מאַיאָנטיק‎
‎means that the plural of py yn is
‏-מאַיאָנטקעס‎

8. If the plural involves a shift in
the stress, this is indicated in abbrevi-
ated form. Thus ‏דירעקטאָר (...אָ'רן)‎
means that the plural of >yupyv7 (i. e.
[DIRE’KTOR]) is ]7'QUPyTT [DIREKTO’ RN].

9. If the second element of a com-
pound stem undergoes change in plural
formation, only the altered stem is
shown in parentheses. If the com-
pound is hyphenated, the altered seg-
ment is preceded by a hyphen. Thus
‏פֿע'ריסיראָד (ירעדער)‎ 106208 4046 6
‏-פֿע'ריסירעדער 18 פֿע'ריס-ראָד 04 181ט/ק‎ 4
the compound is unhyphenated, sus-
pension points are used. Thus
‏קרױנשטאָט (...שטעט)‎ means that the
‏-קרוינשטעט 15 קרױנשטאָט 01 81זט1ק‎

10. The plural indication of a noun
forming part of a longer phrase is
given immediately after the inflectible
noun. Thus jony) ova (]) ‏דער צופּ‎ 2162
that the plural of jonyi ova pix is
‏;צופן בײַס געוויסן‎

11. A dash preceding a plural ending
means that the last letter of the
singular stem is replaced by the sufhx
in the written form of the plural. Thus
‏שורה (--ות)‎ means that the written
form of the plural of me 18 ‏-שורות‎

 

a. Nouns
GENDER

1. The gender of each noun is shown
by means of the definite article which
precedes it: » for masculine, = for
feminine, and om for neuter.

2. Nouns generally used without the
article, e.g. geographic names, have
their gender shown by the appropriate
article in parentheses, e. g. yp’n'yox (7).

3. Nouns listed in the plural are
followed by the symbol ». If necessary,
consult the corresponding entry in YE
to determine whether a singular of the
noun exists, and if so, what its gender
is.

PLuRAL FORMATION

4. The plural form of each noun,
wherever appropriate, is indicated in
parentheses after the noun itself. If
the plural is formed by means of an
ending alone, the ending is cited. Thus
)|( ‏טיש‎ means that the singular is ‏טיש‎
‎and the plural is jw. The symbol (—)
means that the plural is identical with
the singular, e. g. (—) 7y5.

5. If a noun ends in? and the plural
ending is jy, the » is orthographically
replaced in the plural by :. Thus,
(jy) ‏ברי‎ 18 40 be understood to mean
that the plural of »12 is spelled yy:a.

6. If the plural involves a change in
the stressed vowel of the stem, or a

* The basic features of Yid. grammar are
presented in the author’s College Yiddish and
offered in a systematic fashion in the ““Synop-
sis of Grammar” contained in that book.

 

 
