 

XX GUIDELINES

2. In YE equal signs are used addi-
tionally to refer from one entry word
to another, where the target of the
cross-reference appears in immediate
proximity in the alphabetical order.

f. Clusters of Complemented Verbs

The use of short horizontal bars in
connection with clusters of verbs is
explained in §§ 5c19, 20.

 

is separated from the following two
equivalents by a semicolon).

e. Equal Sign

1. In EY equal signs are used be-
tween Yiddish abbreviations and their
fully spelled forms. Ex.:

ד"ה == דאָס הייסט .1.6

600ט0:6ס20 תג 18 ד"ה 4024 208סנח 18ת''
‎of vom ONT (‘that is’).‏

4, Spelling and Pronunciation

word which is not accompanied by a
transcription — e. g. a"7y in the above
example—is to be understood as
written in the ‘“‘phonetic’’ subsystem
of Yiddish orthography. Its pronunci-
ation may be inferred by consulting
the adjoining table on p. xxi.

Regarding condensed indications of
transcription in empty square brackets
{ ], see § 4f7.

b. Coping With Deviations From
Standardized Spelling

The Yid. orthography was standard-
ized, after years of preparatory work,
in 1936 by the YIVO Institute for
Jewish Research in cooperation with
the Central Yiddish School Organiza-
tion in Poland. Since then it has been
adopted by responsible publishers in
many countries.

Deviations from the standardized
orthography may be encountered in
pre-1937 texts, or even in more recent
material, where lack of full conformity
with the codified spelling rules may be

 

a. The Dual Spelling System

Yid. spelling is based on an integra-
tion of two underlying patterns. The
bulk of the vocabulary is rendered in
a system with excellent overall corre-
spondence between sounds and letters
(or letter groups). For these words,
the orthographic form, interpreted
with the help of a pronunciation table
such as that on p. xxi, automati-
cally serves as an indication of the
spoken form as well. Another part of
the vocabulary, of Hebrew-Aramaic
derivation, on the whole retains the
traditional spelling used in those lan-
guages. For Yid. words of the latter
type, the orthographic form and the
phonetic form must be given sepa-
rately. In this Dictionary, the phonetic
form is presented in Latin-letter tran-
scriptions printed in small capitals
between square brackets. For example:

genesis [BREYShES] MwNja ow ‏דער אָנהײב,‎

This means that the word pronounced
[BREYshes] is spelled moxna. Any

 

 

 

 
