 

GUIDELINES xix

v>'xpyx (‘become’ = ]7ym), one may use
the more idiomatic ‏-צעקאָכ|ן זיך ,ס9זסט‎

3. In general, Eng. adverbs in -ly
are not listed in EY since the Yid.
equivalent would be identical in form
with the corresponding adjective.
Thus, glibly is not listed, since the Yid.
equivalents would be the same as those
for glib (which is listed). Where this
correspondence does not hold (e.g.
between the Yid. equivalents of great
and greatly), the Eng. adverb forms a
separate main entry. Where an Eng.
adverb has a special Yid. equivalent
in addition to the one identical with
the adjective, it is introduced by also.
Ex.:

generous ‏ברייט, בריי'טהאַרציק‎
generously also myn ayo a ‏מיט דער‎

This means that among its words for
generously, in addition to those identi-
cal with the equivalents for generous,
Yid. also possesses the special phrase
listed after also.

d. Dash

A dash preceding a Yid. grammatical
symbol or a syntactic indicator sig-
nifies that the symbol or indicator is
applicable to the whole group of Yid.
words which precedes it, going back to
the semicolon (if any) or to the begin-
ning of the entry. Ex.:

פֿאַראַנען; פֿאַראַ'ן, בנימצא א

The grammatical symbol » means that
the preceding adjective is restricted to
predicates (see § 5b10). In the above
example, the dash signifies that the
symbol » applies to }'y7¥5 as well as
‏פֿאַראַנען 10 806 +טט) בנימצא ס}‎ which

 

means that both in fun and for fun
are rendered in Yid. as DYNNUNP "1S.
2. Where an Eng. alternative cor-

responds to a Yid. alternative, the .

correspondence holds between the re-
spective members of each pair. Ex.:

be easy/hard ‏אָנ|קומ(ען גרינג/שווער‎

This ‏אָנ|קומ|ען גרינג 1121 1628 12טמזזס!‎
00116500008 10 86 6887 226 ‏אָנ|קומ(ען‎
‎synw corresponds to be hard.

3. The symbol ‘/...’’ means that
additional alternatives may be sub-
stituted at will, according to the
pattern illustrated. Thus, ‘‘what/
when/...’’ appearing under know means
that additional interrogatives may be
substituted (‘‘who, where,”’ etc.).

c. Also Entries

1. Where a special submeaning of an
Eng. word can be rendered in Yid.
either by a special term or by the
most general equivalent of the entry
word, the special term is introduced by
the word also. Ex.:

hall (large room) (7) dyr v= || (meeting
room) also (}) D'ypyd ow

This means that byt covers both sub-
meanings of hall: ‘large room’ and
‘meeting room’; ‏,לאָקאַ'ל‎ however, cov-
ers only the latter submeaning.

2. If an Eng. phrase can be rendered
in Yid. either literally or idiomatically,
the idiomatic alternative is introduced
by also. For example:

.} 6006 || צאָ'רנדיק, צעקאָ'כט ‎furious‏
‏צעקאָכ|ן זיך 6150

This means that in addition to render-
ing become furious literally as j|>yn

 

 

 
