 

GUIDELINES XV

meaning, and by semicolons if less
close. In a few entries, a question
mark or exclamation point marks the
end of a Yid. equivalent.

In some cases additional specifica-
tion of submeanings may be found in
an adjoining entry. Thus, opposite
emotional two Yid. equivalents are
cited, separated by a semicolon. In the
adjacent entry, emotion, the submean-
ings are separately glossed.

Where the nuances of Yid. alter-
natives are not specified, further infor-
mation may be obtained by consulting
appropriate entries in YE. For ex-
ample, to choose between ]»w and
syub, both of which appear as equiva-
lents for ‘fair (weather)’’ (see §5
above), each of these words may be
looked up in YE. There it will be
found that the connotations of ]"w are
beauty; those of yond are clarity,
limpidity.

10. Eng. phrases exemplifying usage
are occasionally given in light-face
type, if the corresponding Yid. con-
struction differs sharply from the Eng.,
or if the specification of meanings by
parenthetic phrases is (or, if given,
would be) inordinately abstract or
complex. See, for example, the entry
by in EY.

11, Where a submeaning is most
easily presented in the context of an
example, this is done by placing the
abbreviated entry word in bold-face
type and the purely illustrative con-
text in light-face. Ex.:

all (everything) yx || this isa. I have
‏וי דאָס האָב איך ניט‎ Wd

 

indicated in parentheses in light-face
type. Ex.:

fair (blond) “nya ,byn || (weather)
‏שיין‎ yond J (just) ‏גערע'כט, נערעכטיק‎

Submeanings of the Eng. word are
specified sometimes by means of syno-
nyms, e.g. “blond” or ‘“‘just,’’ and at
other times by the context in which
they are used, e. g. ‘‘weather.”’

6. Often the most common meaning
is assumed to be clear without specifi-
cation, and only a more special mean-
ing is specified. Ex.:

false wbyb || (unfaithful) ‏או'מנעטרײַ‎

The most ordinary meaning of false,
namely, ‘untrue’, is not specified.

7. Eng. homonyms appear as sepa-
rate entries with superscript num-
bers, e.g. the adjective-adverb fast?
‘rapid(ly)’ and the noun-verb fast?
‘abstain, abstention from food’. The
decision as to what is a submeaning of
the same word and what is a separate,
homonymous word is, of course, often
conventional.

8 Submeanings of phrases are speci-
fied in the same way as submeanings
of entry words. Here is a simplified
example:

דער װײַזער (01004) || ײ האַנט (הענט) ‎hand‏
‏אַרױפֿ|לײנ|ן אַ האַנט ‎lay hs on‏ 4 (ס)
פּאַקן (02908) - אויף

9. Groups of Yid. synonyms, given
as alternative equivalents for Eng.
main entry words or subentries, are
separated by commas if fairly close in

 

 

 
