 

xii PREFACE

Dr. Weinreich’s Preface refers to his anticipated paper ‘‘Standard Yiddish
in the Second Half of the Twentieth Century,” which, as a short companion
publication, was intended to set forth the scholarly and practical purposes
of the Dictionary and the linguistic ideas underlying it. No manuscript
was left, but it is definitely possible to construct the paper by leaning on
the author’s copious notes, on correspondence with his colleagues, on his
published studies and, above all, on the evidence of the Dictionary itself.
It would be a great loss indeed if the paper contemplated by the author of
the Dictionary were not to be published at least in the form in which YIVO
can offer it. It is hoped that it will appear in 1968.

The designation of the Dictionary as Modern was suggested by the
editors of McGraw-Hill and was approved by the author. It implies the
obligation to keep subsequent editions up to date, and YIVO pledges its
utmost in the achievement of this task. In effectuating future changes,
whose necessity the author himself so clearly stresses in his Preface, the
users of the Dictionary have a definite part to play. Consequently, the
author’s request for criticisms and suggestions with a view toward further
improvements is urgently repeated. Correspondence should be addressed
to the YIVO Institute for Jewish Research, 1048 Fifth Avenue, New York,
N. Y. 10028.

YIVO wishes to express its heartfelt thanks to its friends who have
assisted in bringing this ambitious plan of publishing the Dictionary to
fruition. Above all, it is indebted to the late Mr. Solomon Bogorad of
Rochester, N. Y., whose bequest in 1964 made it possible for the Institute
to contemplate the publication of Uriel Weinreich’s dictionary, and to the
Atran Foundation, Inc., whose generous grants have helped tremendously
in the subsequent stages of the project after typesetting had begun. Assis-
tance was further rendered by Mr. Harry A. Abramson, Mr. Julius Boren-
stein, the Saul Brodsky and Ida Seltzer family, Mrs. Leah Eisenberg,

Mr. Joseph Perlov in memory of his wife Dora, and Philip and Edward
Solomon.

April, 1968 YIVO INSTITUTE FOR JEWISH RESEARCH

 

 

 
