 

PREFACE xi

The draft of the preceding Preface was written in March, 1967. On March
30, 1967 Uriel Weinreich died at the age of forty without having seen the
product of many years’ work in print. However, he had brought to conclu-
sion the whole manuscript of the Dictionary and also had read the galley
proofs of both parts and then a sizable part of the second proofs. Further-
more, he had discussed with the McGraw-Hill Book Company various de-
tails concerning the final shape of the Dictionary, which was so close to
his heart. It is due to the self-denying cooperation of Mrs. Beatrice Wein-
reich as well as to the efforts of Messrs. Szymon Dawidowicz and Max
Weinreich that the Dictionary can appear in full conformity with the
author’s intentions. Mrs. Chana Mlotek kindly participated in reading
the page proofs. Messrs. Isadore Hoffman and Meyer Weitzel of Maurice
Jacobs, Inc. were responsible for making up the book and completing the
work.

When we invited Dr. Weinreich in 1964 to publish his English- Yiddish,
Yiddish-English dictionary under YIVO auspices, we believed his manuscript
to be roughly ready for the printer. The author himself thought otherwise.
Hundreds of idioms and scores of terms pertaining to Jewish life and cul-
ture had to be added; many of those had been accumulated by Columbia
University’s Language and Culture Atlas of Ashkenazic Jewry, of which
Dr. Weinreich was the planner and first director. The grammatical, pho-
netical, and phraseological analyses had to be revised to meet the most
exacting requirements. He therefore again reworked the manuscript from
beginning to end. During the academic year 1965-66, when he resided, free
of teaching duties, at the Center for Advanced Studies in the Behavioral
Sciences at Stanford, Calif., he spent the bulk of his time on the Dictionary.
Upon his return to Columbia University in September, 1966, and until a
few days before his passing, the Dictionary continued to be his major pre-
occupation. The material presented in it thus bears the mark of highest
accuracy. As regards the theoretical foundations of the Dictionary, it is
firmly built on the author’s extended studies in semantics and lexicography,
which have won him broad recognition in the worldwide community of
linguists.

 

 

 
