 

PREFACE ix

Silberberg and Mendl Hoffman, all of whom gave aid and encouragement
while he was working on the school dictionary.

With the growth of interest in Yiddish studies, the need for a modern
English-Yiddish, Yiddish-English dictionary for the advanced student be-
came more and more apparent. Since the early 1950s the author has con-
tinually worked toward this end. The encouragement given by Professor
Herbert H. Paper at an early stage of this work is gratefully remembered.
When a fresh prospect for publication arose in 1964, the author greatly
expanded and thoroughly revised his material until it was brought to its
present form. The principles that governed the compilation of this Dic-
tionary, in particular as concerns the portrayal of standard Yiddish and
the direction of further development indicated by the choices of variants
that were made, will be set forth in a paper, ‘Standard Yiddish in the
Second Half of the Twentieth Century,’’ to be published by YIVO as a
separate booklet.

It is the author’s pleasant duty to thank the large number of peopl
who helped in the preparation and publication of the Modern English
Yiddish Yiddish-English Dictionary. Mr. Richard Zuckerman offered nu.
merous helpful suggestions. Professor Max Weinreich contributed many
citations from his files and recommendations about the choice of variants.
Mr. Szymon Dawidowicz of the YIVO staff was of immeasurable help as
an adviser in matters of essence and as a superb proofreader. But it was
the selfless, expert assistance of Professor Mordkhe Schaechter which more
than any other factor helped to ensure that the best modern usage was re-
flected in the Dictionary. The responsibility for any deficiencies must
remain with the author; the credit for whatever virtues the Dictionary
contains must be fairly shared with his collaborators, especially with Pro-
fessor Schaechter.

Dr. Maurice Jacobs was always ready to meet the rigorous demands
involved in this intricate work of typography, which required two alpha-
betical systems written in opposite directions. With great ingenuity anc
tireless effort, Mr. Philip Herstein, compositor of the book for the Maurice
Jacobs Press, was responsible for giving the Dictionary the quality of it:
appearance.

The encouragement received from the late Mr. Aaron Fishman oj
Philadelphia is also recalled.

Finally, the author acknowledges his gratitude to his wife, Beatrice
Silverman Weinreich, who participated in the work from beginning to end
and who lent a hand with every aspect of the work, from the subtles
problems of planning to the most tedious clerical routines.

Pressing a language into the mold of a bilingual dictionary of necessity
results in a somewhat biased characterization of its structure and its re
sources. But the task cannot be shirked forever. One must begin somewhere
and look to future editions for the progressive elimination of such inade-

 

 

 
