 

viil PREFACE

lettres and the employment of the language as a medium of the press, of
political movements, of educational systems up to the college level, of schol-
arly research, and occasionally of political administration. This rapid growth
has taken place simultaneously in many countries, sometimes with only
limited planning and coordination. The Dictionary may therefore also have
significance for accomplished speakers and writers of Yiddish as a checklist
of modern terminology in which innovation has been relatively decentralized.
Where the author was faced with a multiplicity of competing innovations,
he generally elected to recommend those that struck him as most felicitous
from the point of view of precision, idiomaticity of patterning, and ade-
quacy within a broader terminological framework capable of further
expansion.

For a basic: introduction to Yiddish grammar, the user of this Dictionary
is referred to the author’s College Yiddish (New York: YIVO Institute for
Jewish Research, 1949; 4th revised edition, 2d printing, 1966; 399 pp.).
For additional vocabulary, the reader may consult with great profit Nahum
Stutchkoff’s Der oytser fun der yidisher shprakh (‘‘Thesaurus of the Yiddish
Language”; New York: YIVO, 1950; 60 plus 934 pp.). Attention is also
called to the unabridged Yiddish defining dictionary, the second volume
of which (out of the projected ten) appeared in 1966.*

Aside from special-purpose word lists and phrase books, the only
English-Yiddish dictionary available to students has been Alexander
Harkavy’s work, first published in 1891 and later reissued several times
without basic changes. It has long been inadequate, not only because
of its age, but also because it was designed mainly for people knowing
Yiddish and aiming at a mastery of English. Harkavy’s modernized and
more comprehensive Yiddish-English-Hebrew dictionary (New York,
1925; 2d edition, 1928) has been far more useful and, in a sense, can still
serve as a key to the great works of Yiddish literature of the late nineteenth
and early twentieth centuries. It is, however, plainly deficient with regard to
contemporary literary and newspaper usage and scholarly prose. Moreover,
it lacks an English-Yiddish counterpart.

Apart from the vocabulary appended to College Yiddish, one of the
author’s early attempts at tackling lexicographic problems was his prepa-
ration of a small dictionary intended for the pupils of Yiddish schools on
the elementary and high school levels. At the suggestion of Mr. Joseph
Chromow, work was begun in 1948. A draft version was completed a year
later but was never published. The author would like to take this oppor-
tunity to recall with gratitude the help of the late Mr. Chromow, Dr. Chaim
Pomerantz, and Mrs. Rebecca Tcherikower, as well as that of Messrs. Israel

* Judah A. Joffe and Yudel Mark (eds.), Groyser verterbukh fun der yidisher shprakh, New York: Yiddish
Dictionary Committee, Inc.

 

 

 

 
