 

 

AUTHOR’S PREFACE

In the years since World War II, there has developed in the United States
and other English-speaking countries a greatly increased interest in the
Yiddish language, its literature, and the culture of its speakers. The lan-
guage has become a subject of study on many levels, from colleges and
universities to widely scattered informal groups. Translations from the
Yiddish and scholarly investigations of the Yiddish language and the re-
lated culture have been actively pursued. This strong interest has made
the lack of suitable reference books and study materials all the more acutely
felt.

The principal purpose of the Modern English- Yiddish Yiddish-English
Dictionary is to furnish the advanced student of Yiddish with access to the
language of modern cultivated usage. It is meant to serve him as a guide
to the correct and idiomatic employment of the language in speech and in
writing. As an aid in the reading of Yiddish written materials, it is likely
to be particularly helpful with nonfiction texts.

The Dictionary is designed in the main for persons who have a firm
grounding in English and at least a rudimentary command of Yiddish and
are eager to broaden their mastery of Yiddish vocabulary and phraseology.
Accordingly, the Yiddish rather than the English material has been pho-
netically and grammatically analyzed, and English glosses have been used,
wherever appropriate, to specify semantic detail. Likewise, the ‘‘Guide-
lines for Use of the Dictionary’’ has been presented in far more detail in
English (pp. xiii-xliii) than in Yiddish (pp. r-1y).

Like any other language, literary Yiddish contains a number of ortho-
graphic, phonetic, grammatical, and semantic variants. The ones most
likely to be encountered by the reader of Yiddish texts have been incor-
porated in the Yiddish-English part of the Dictionary. On the other hand,
since the learner of the language will want to have firm recommendations
as to his own usage, the English-Yiddish part includes variant forms only
sparingly.

The growth of standardized Yiddish has been stimulated since the
middle of the nineteenth century by the precipitous development of belles

vii

 

 
