INTRODUCTION

Y rope is many hundreds of years old, going back perhaps to the
tenth century. Since the thirteenth century, a considerable body of
writings in Yiddish has accumulated, ranging in character from
glosses on the Bible to long elaborate poems based on entire biblical
books. But Yiddish literature as a body of imaginative writings,
composed in prose and verse by self-declared literary men and
women, is only about a century and a half old.

It is a literature that starts tentatively, hesitantly, with modest
didactic fictions and plays, intended mostly to instruct and
somewhat to amuse. Then, as the east European Jewish world
enters a period of major creative upsurge at about the middle of the
nineteenth century, the literature speeds to a climax of achieve-
ment. The fictions of Mendele, Sholem Aleichem, and Perets writ-
ten during the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries form a high
point seldom exceeded by Yiddish writers of later decades.

In the opening years of the century, Yiddish literature breaks
away from its early shtet! (small town) setting, quickly taking ona
more urban and sophisticated character. It soon spreads across
large parts of the globe, with important centers in Russia, Poland,
and the United States. In the space of no more than six or seven
decades it reenacts—or perhaps more accurately, it parallels—the
lines of development which mark the literatures of Europe; but it
does so under conditions of great, often extreme stress. The inner
thythms of Yiddish literary life are more compressed and,
sometimes, frantic than those of any other literature we know. By
the 1920s there are many striking equivalents in Yiddish to the
modernist revolution that is overtaking the cultures of Europe and
America. But then, just as it enters this phase, Yiddish literature,
like the people from whom it stems, is crushed by the weight of
twentieth-century history. Many of its leading figures—poets,
novelists, critics—are destroyed by the symmetrical, sometimes
