2 Introduction

linked terrors of Hitlerism and Stalinism; and what remains of Yid-
dish literature, badly shaken and displaced, enters a phase of
shock, mourning, and tragic reflectiveness. The losses are in-
calculable—whole generations of writers, millions of people who
formed their actual and potential audiences, and the complex in-
stitutional networks which in Europe sustained the Yiddish
culture. There is still, after the Second World War, some brilliant
work done in Yiddish, more in poetry than in prose; but for the
most part it is now a literature of survivors, displaced and aging.
By the end of the twentieth century its historians will evidently be
faced with the melancholy task of acknowledging its termination,
since almost nowhere today are there young writers for whom the
use of Yiddish remains inevitable, spontaneous, organic.

Is there, we may wonder, another body of imaginative writing in
the modern era quite so rapid and cramped in its internal develop-
ment, quite so harried by the brutal pressures of modern history,
quite so bloodied at its point of fulfillment? All the literary tenden-
cies and impulses which in other, more fortunate literatures take
centuries to unfold in leisurely and organic rhythms are in Yiddish
pressed into decades, sometimes merely a few years. There is a diz-
zying speed of motion within Yiddish literary life, from school to
school, subject to subject, style to style. But there is also a deep and
finally unbreakable continuity with the Yiddish cultural past and,
perhaps less visibly but at least as deeply, with the whole tradition
of Jewish life, thought, and writing, stretching by now across thou-
sands of years.

In the time that the editors of this anthology have devoted to its
preparation, it has come to seem that our book—not by intention
but rather by historical misfortune—may serve to mark not only
the end of a rich literary tradition but of an entire phase of modern
Jewish history, that in which Yiddish served as the dominant
language in the weekday life of millions of Jews and then, for some
of them, as the medium for a partially secularized culture. It would
be naive to suppose that any single volume could provide an ade-
quate record of the achievements of this culture, but our hope is to
preserve at least a few examples of distinguished Yiddish poetry in
both the original texts and responsible English translations. As for
this introduction, we can do no more than note a few of the main
historical and cultural circumstances in which Yiddish poetry
