Introduction 3

developed, as well as describe a few of its major characteristics and
figures.

Old Yiddish Writing

Throughout their centuries of exile, Jews have adapted or “Juda-
ized’”’ the languages of their neighbors, putting them to their own
daily use and in at least one instance creating a new language, Yid-
dish. Within the organized Jewish communities, however, Hebrew-
Aramaic was always given the place of honor as loshn koydesh, the
sacred tongue, which never lost its status of holy supremacy. One
might even say that the Jews in exile turned to and improvised
other languages precisely in order to keep intact the supremacy of
Hebrew--Aramaic.

At least until the nineteenth century, Hebrew remained the sole
medium of scholarship, serious writing, and reading for the learned
and intellectual members of Jewish communities. Yiddish, by con-
trast, was the language of the home, the street, and family cor-
respondence, usually regarded as a necessary and, with time, rather
endearing aid with which to make one’s way across the treacherous
ground of the diaspora. Hebrew expressed the highest religious
and intellectual ideals of all Jews—it was the universal connecting
link, in exile, to the holy books and their commentaries. Thus ex-
alted, Hebrew remained comparatively unchanged over the cen-
turies, deprived of that lively transforming power which a
language in daily use can possess, while Yiddish underwent con-
stant and profound changes in diction, usage, and pronunciation.

Once modern Yiddish literature began to appear by the end of
the eighteenth century, perhaps its first task was to rid itself of the
petrified literary language of old Yiddish literature and to draw
upon the vitality of Yiddish common speech as employed in the
various eastern European dialects of the language. What we now
think of as good “literary” Yiddish—the language of the major
prose writers—draws openly and eagerly from immediate folk
sources and imitates ordinary conversation. One of the great
masters of this style is of course Sholem Aleichem, in whose work
Yiddish takes on an incomparable pithiness.

Yiddish, then, wound its way through Europe across the cen-
turies, producing a body of works that it would be difficult,
