4 Introduction

perhaps also unnecessary, to fit into familiar genres. For this
writing is often mixed in purpose and character, meant primarily to
transmit the great tradition of Hebrew-Aramaic learning and letters
to those who cannot reach it directly on their own, but sometimes
also to satisfy such less exalted ends as diversion and entertain-
ment. Old Yiddish writings, stretching from the thirteenth century
to the second half of the eighteenth, are mainly pietistic, homiletic,
and didactic, but partly also fictional and folkloristic.

There are Yiddish glosses along the margins of Hebrew manu-
scripts, originating at least from the twelfth century; Yiddish glos-
saries for individual books of the Bible; and by the sixteenth cen-
tury a Yiddish dictionary and concordance for the entire Bible—the
first book, as far as is known, to have been printed in Yiddish. By
the sixteenth century, printed translations appear in Yiddish of the
Pentateuch, and by the seventeenth century, in Amsterdam, of the
entire Bible. This work of translation continues into the modern
period, an important concern for such major Yiddish writers as
Mendele and Perets and, a bit later, for the poets in New York
known as Di Yunge. In our own century the poet Yehoash com-
pleted a fresh translation into Yiddish of the entire Bible that, with
later revisions, continues to be a standard work.

A Yiddish poetry begins to appear by the fourteenth century,
with poems that retell biblical tales. Such verse narratives—
preserved in manuscript and discovered in the Cairo Geniza*
—were based on the stories of Abraham, Joseph, and Aaron and
were embellished with talmudic legends and midrashim (homilies),
thus allowing for a narrative and thematic elaboration beyond the
spare biblical story. An epic poem about the binding of Isaac
(Akeda) was very popular among Yiddish readers for centuries, be-
ing circulated both in manuscript and printed versions. Also pop-
ular was the Shmuel bukh (Book of Samuel), which appeared for
the first time in Augsburg, Germany, in 1544, though some
scholars believe its probable author, Moshe Esrim Vearba of
Jerusalem, wrote it in the last third of the fifteenth century.

*Geniza: a storage place for texts that cannot, according to Jewish custom, be
destroyed because they bear God’s name. Discovery of the immense Geniza in
Fostat (Old Cairo) in 1896 brought to light about 200,000 literary fragments,
books, and documents, including the earliest known manuscripts of Yiddish
poetry.
