Introduction 5

An important strand of old Yiddish writing starts in the second
half of the sixteenth century with homiletic prose works directed
mainly to women. Indeed, as the Yiddish critic and literary
historian S. Niger has stressed, since women did not customarily
receive much education in Hebrew, they became a major audience
for such Yiddish writings. The Tsene-rene by Rabbi Jacob B. Isaac
Ashkenazi was a very popular work of this kind, attracting lay
readers of both sexes and even children. It consists of a miscellany
of tales, midrashim, and exegetical comments woven around a
selection of quotations from the weekly portions of the Pentateuch,
the Haftarot and the Megilot.* Written in a simple and lively style,
this work has gone through more than 200 editions and is still
available today.

Such writings are not, as a rule, notable for intellectual
originality; they simply follow, in a selective way, the Hebrew-
Aramaic sources that were familiar to the learned segments of the
Jewish community. Where they do show some originality is in their
popularization, their transmission of often recondite material in a
style and manner likely to appeal to an unsophisticated but eager
audience.

Still another popular form in old Yiddish writing, found as early
as the sixteenth century, is the tkhine, a noncanonical prayer of-
fered up by an individual supplicant, apart from the synagogical
liturgy. A number of formulaic patterns allow for varying contents
and emphases according to the needs of the individual. Mainly
regarded as prayers for women, and sometimes attributed to
women authors, these prayers are marked, in about equal parts, by
sincerity, simplicity, and sentimentality. Composed mainly in
prose, the tkhines were printed in booklet form and are still
available today.

A large ethical literature was meanwhile accumulating in Yid-
dish, again providing instruction in traditional principles for un-
tutored readers. Some of these were translations of standard
Hebrew texts, others original compositions. Within such texts

*The Pentateuch, Haftarot, and Megilot are portions of the Bible that are read
publicly in the synagogue. Pentateuch: five books of Moses. Haftarot: portions
from the Prophets. Megilot, literally “scrolls” of the Bible: Ruth, the Song of
Songs, Lamentations, Ecclesiastes, and Esther.
