6 Introduction

there would be interwoven parables and exeniplary tales, often
derived from Hebrew sources. The famous Mayse bukh
(storybook), which first appeared in Basle in 1602, is a collection of
257 stories, most of them based on talmudic and midrashic sources,
though some of the narratives seem obviously borrowed from the
literatures and folk materials of surrounding European cultures.

Niger distinguishes between works like the Mayse bukh, based
on traditional Jewish sources, and those like the Bove bukh,
adapted and rewritten from Italian by a Hebrew scholar and Yid-
dish poet, Elijah Bokhur, who lived in sixteenth-century Italy. The
Bove bukh is a free Yiddish version of an Italian romance, reduced
from 1,400 stanzas to 650, and with some of the erotic material of
the original text cut out. The characters are sometimes Judaized, in
several instances for comic effect, and for this purpose it seemed
quite acceptable, apparently, to Yiddish readers that medieval
kings and knights should observe Jewish customs. Both the Mayse
bukh and the Bove bukh were extremely popular.

Very much part of an indigenous Yiddish tradition is a re-
markable work, the memoirs of Glikl from Hameln (1645—1719),
which provide a lively, shrewd, and indeed quite indispensable pic-
ture of Jewish society in central Europe during her lifetime.

Throughout old Yiddish writing we can observe, then, the coex-
istence and frequently the mixing of indigenous Jewish material
and borrowed material. But this distinction, in principle a useful
one, should not be overdrawn, because there is a constant melding
of indigenous and borrowed traditions. The same caution is needed
with regard to literary genres. Few, if any, of the writers of old Yid-
dish thought of their work in the way modern poets and novelists
are likely to—and they did not hesitate, in their popularizations
and elucidations, to mix genres freely.

Some Background

After the collapse of the false messianism of Shabtai Tsvi in the
seventeenth century, the east European Jews turned inward, enter-
ing a lengthy phase of harsh rabbinic orthodoxy. The Jewish com-
munities tried slowly to regain their moral footing; they shut
themselves off from intellectual novelties and adventures; they
