Introduction 7

held their members to a strict regimen of behavior and belief,
reestablishing traditional religious customs.

By the second half of the eighteenth century, there were signs of
change among the east European Jews, first in the movement of
religious enthusiasm called Hasidism and then in the Haskalah, or
Enlightenment. :

Though entirely indigenous within the Jewish experience,
Hasidism shared similarities of tone and outlook with a variety of
heterodox religious tendencies that were becoming visible in the
West at about the same time. Hasidism stirred profound enthu-
siasm within large segments of the Jewish people, satisfying long-
thwarted needs for emotional release in a population dis-
ciplined—perhaps overdisciplined—by orthodoxy. While not
opposed in principle to learning, Hasidism found wisdom in the
experience of rapture and the fruits of intuition, rather than in
theology or legalism. Organized around the dominance of
tsadikim, or holy masters, who were believed to be intermediaries
between the divine and the mundane—though in the later phases
of the movement some of these wise men were no more than petty
despots—Hasidism preached a kind of romanticist ethic. “Every
Jew,” said its founder, the Baal Shem Tov, “is an organ of the
Shekhine, or Divine Presence.”

The ascetic inclinations of Jewish religious life were brushed
aside by the Hasidim. They favored dancing, sometimes a little
drinking; they sought moments of ecstasy as an opening to
religious zeal; they found strategies for narrowing the gap between
the profane and the sacred. Hasidism offered a vision of spiritual
rapture and communal bonding in this world. It offered emotional
refreshment and homely wisdom but, perhaps most of all, a
renewal of intimacy with both self and cosmos.

Hasidism developed a body of oral tales and sayings in Yiddish,
later written down by scribes in Hebrew, which is of great literary
and moral value. There are two main types of Hasidic stories:
hagiographies glorifying the founders and leaders of the movement
by describing their marvelous deeds, and tales (notably those of
Rabbi Nakhman of Bratslav) which subtly depict, in both
languages, the rewards and difficulties of faith through symbolic
devices and mystical nuances. These stories reflect the charac-
teristic Hasidic ethos, conveyed in cryptic remarks and aphor-
isms—a kind of wisdom poetry.
