8 Introduction

Hasidism contributed richly to Yiddish literature. A writer of
skeptical inclination like Y. L. Perets was, for example, strongly
drawn to the Hasidic tales, seeking there kernels of insight which,
he felt, might be separated from the shells of superstition.
Hasidism used Yiddish as its only spoken language, thereby help-
ing to raise it to a plane of conscious esteem previously unknown
in the world of east European Jews. Where the Haskalah intelli-
gentsia would turn to Yiddish out of tactical necessity, the Hasidic
sages used the language in a spontaneous and natural way. By the
early twentieth century, Yiddish writers in search of “a usable
past’’—which includes, in one or another way, almost every Yid-
dish writer—would eagerly mine the rich accumulation of oral and
recorded folk material that lay waiting among the common folk. To
many of these writers the Hasidic stories seemed wonderfully rich
in dramatic possibilities. For the great Hasidic figures, like the Baal
Shem Tov and Rabbi Nakhman of Bratslav, had been genuinely in-
spired poet-sages whose parables and tales anticipate, at some
points, the allusive and indeterminate character of literary moder-
nism.

Yiddish poetry is rich with Hasidic themes, dramatic renderings,
and adaptations. Many of the poets recognized in the Hasidic
masters their indigenous precursors—artistic temperaments of an
earlier time still working within folk and traditional Jewish modes.
Such poets as Jacob Glatstein, Zishe Landau, and Itsik Manger
have vividly portrayed Hasidic sages and situations; and some-
times a Yiddish poet, like Manger, would imaginatively transplant
Hasidic figures into later, darker circumstances.

Confined mainly to the thin merchant class and portions of the
Hebrew-writing intelligentsia, the Haskalah registered—at some
remove and with significant variations—the influence of European
enlightenment thought. Haskalah leaders in eastern Europe felt
that rabbinic Judaism had become petrified in sterile ritual and
pedantic casuistry; that rabbinism often held the Jewish com-
munities in a tyrannical vise of opinion; that the east European
Jews needed an infusion of fresh thought and secular learning, not
to replace but to complement religious faith. The Haskalah hoped
to scrape away the barnacles of superstition from the body of
ceremony and observance. It wanted secular subjects included in
