Introduction 9

Jewish education. It looked forward to a reconciliation between the
core of traditional Judaism and modern thought in philosophy and
science. The German Haskalah had sought a partial entry into
Gentile social and intellectual life; but in Russia and Poland the
emphasis was on the intellectual revival of the Jewish community
itself, if only because the repressive policies of tsarism made
impractical any hope of breaking out of the ghetto.

The maskilim, or enlighteners, who served as spokesmen for the
Haskalah, had little love for Yiddish; they still took it for granted
that Hebrew (together with the language of the country in which
they lived) was the only possible medium of serious and elevated
discourse, But insofar as they now meant to enlighten the masses,
they had to use the language of the masses, and that of course was
Yiddish. What began as a tactical device soon became a source of
delight; many of the Haskalah intellectuals who started to write in
Yiddish with some degree of condescension came to love its
freshness and pithiness, its vivid mirroring of the folk experience.
Mendele Moykher Sforim, the first major Yiddish writer of the
modern period, started out as a Haskalah writer, but as he
developed his gifts, writing both in Hebrew and Yiddish, he left
behind him the dry, explicit moralizing of the Haskalah and
grounded his work in a vivid, often satirical rendering of the shtedl
world.

The direct contribution of the Haskalah to Yiddish literature is
somewhat problematic. If it led writers to the new idea of purely
literary composition, it also imposed on them, more immediately, a
weight of rigid moralism. If it exposed them to stimulating in-
fluences from the West, it also narrowed their sensibilities to a
scratchy rationalism. Yet as an agency opening new paths for Yid-
dish literature, the Haskalah had an enormous importance in its
day, second only to that of Hasidism.

The fierce disputes between Haskalah and Hasidism are now a
matter of history and in their own right need not here concern us;
what matters for the historian of Yiddish literature is that both the
Haskalah and Hasidism, each from its own vantage point, served to
hasten the breakup of traditional ways of life, a breakup that was
in effect a precondition for the emergence of modern writing.
Because this inner Jewish struggle opened up, so to say, the ter-
