10 Introduction

rain of the shtetl, Yiddish literature could find a broader path. Still
more, the conflict between the Haskalah and Hasidism gave later
Yiddish writers a rich subject—the relationship of two worldviews,
rationalist and mystical, sober and ecstatic, outward-looking and
hermetic. This interplay between worldviews can be seen as one in
a series of recurrent philosophical encounters within Jewish life.
External influences, filtered through the relatively emancipated
German Jews, were starting to leave their mark— indeed, it is possi-
ble to see the Haskalah in retrospect as an agency for modulating
these influences. Still more forcefully, Hasidism appears partly as
one of those recurrent outbursts of inner creative energy that has
kept occurring within the cramped limits of the Jewish diaspora.

During the last quarter of the nineteenth century this conflict,
still largely contained within the boundaries of religious life, tends
to be replaced by a still more bitter one, that between an insurgent
Jewish secularism and all the strands of religious faith. By the
1880s and 1890s both the Jewish labor and socialist movement
(later organized under the name of the Bund) and various proto-
Zionist and Zionist groups establish themselves as significant
presences within the east European Jewish world. Zionism, which
provides ideological support for the new Hebrew poetry being
written in Russia and Poland, will reach its greatest strength a
decade or two later, but the Bund rapidly becomes a powerful
secular force among the east European Jews. At first the Bund
takes a narrowly cosmopolitan or internationalist position, expres-
sing no special interest in Yiddish culture, even though almost all
of its members use it as their natural language; but then, somewhat
like the Haskalah before it, the Bund has to turn to Yiddish in order
to reach the masses and, again like the Haskalah intelligentsia,
finds the language pleasing. Before long Yiddish becomes for the
Jewish labor movement not a mere tool of propaganda but a
cultural asset with both national and intrinsic value.

The rise of these secular Jewish movements signals a remarkable
moment in modern Jewish history. Despite recurrent severe repres-
sions by the tsarist regimes, the growing poverty of the shtetl, and
increasing social disorganization—or partly because of these?—the
east European Jewish community during the last half of the
nineteenth century experiences a creative renaissance. It is as if
long-dormant energies suddenly are released; as if the continued
