Introduction 11

availability of the Hebraic tradition, even if somewhat rigidified,
gives the Jews inner resources with which to burst out in fresh
ways, with fresh ideas and with fresh hopes. The idea of liberation,
no doubt influenced by the growth of nationalism in Europe,
sparks the Jewish community, and with it there appear new
postures—less passive, more combative, engaged now with the
world as it is and not prepared to wait for some ultimate redemp-
tion. The Jewish milieu is inflamed with sentiments of expectation
and passion. New thinkers appear; new magazines are started; new
groups are formed; new writers speak out. Modern Hebrew poetry
begins its effort to forge a colloquial idiom out of a language which
had for centuries been more or less fixed; modern Yiddish poetry
begins its effort to create a literary language out of a common
idiom and several dialects seen as excessively fluid.

In this moment of ferment, the Jewish labor movement played a
central role. It persuaded many young Yiddish writers that worldly
activity is a proper or acceptable attitude for Jews, a persuasion
that would soon find a wide range of expression in fiction and
poetry. It gave them a vibrant idealistic theme: the struggle of the
newly formed Jewish working class for a decent life in the cities of
eastern Europe and the United States, as well as the pitiful situation
of those Jewish craftsmen who remained behind in the shtetl. And
perhaps most important, it gave them an eager and growing
audience, that layer of semi-educated and self-educated Yiddish-
speaking workers who saw in the new literature a reason for com-
munal pride and a reflection of their own yearnings for cultural
possession. Through the next several decades, this segment of the
Jewish population would form a significant and self-conscious
portion of the public for Yiddish literature, hoping to find in or
through it a fragment of that culture which the increasing
secularization of Jewish life was making them desire.

The three or four decades in which modern Yiddish writing first
declared itself—from the late nineteenth century to the start of the
First World War—formed what Gershom Scholem has called “a
plastic hour,” one of those intervals in which the idea of trans-
formation, both individual and collective, takes on the gripping
colors of possibility. Jewish life, both in eastern Europe and the
western hemisphere, blazed with feverish hopes, controversies,
passions. Traditional orthodoxy, no longer in sole command yet
