 

12 Introduction

still powerful, continued to exert its hold—a hold of memory and
commandment—over the young rebels who denied it most violent-
ly. The shtetl slid into a period of economic disintegration and
social decomposition, yet also flickered with a late brilliance.
Meanwhile, it was surrendering its most gifted sons and daughters
to the cities of eastern Europe and the United States, where they
would become a generation of restive proletarians and intel-
lectuals. Secular ideologies excited the newly formed Jewish work-
ing class and set in motion the struggle for a restored Jewish
nationality. A-growing intelligentsia, free-floating, impoverished,
and inexperienced, dreamed of a Jewish cultural renaissance, of
assimilating the literary and artistic heritage of the West, and of
linking itself to the new revolutionary movements of Europe—
sometimes dreamed of all three at once, without perceiving any
internal contradictions.

What was happening here within the confines of the Russian
Pale and on the streets of the immigrant quarters in America would
seem to refute any simple notions of economic determinism. The
cultural upheaval of the Jews occurred at a moment of wretched
poverty, severe exploitation, and the traumas of enforced
proletarianization. It constituted still another instance of the
capacity Jewish life has shown through the centuries for spiritual
self-renewal—a capacity that, not at all paradoxically, may be a
consequence of holding firm to ancient sources and traditions.

Some Formative Circumstances

A primary task of the embryonic Yiddish literature was to establish
its right to exist, its right to a modest place at, if not at the head of,
the Jewish table. For those who have grown up in another culture
this may seem strange; they are likely to think that any culture
genuinely rooted in the experience of a people is simply there, and
no fuss need be made about its “rights.’’ The anomaly is that those
who most harshly questioned the capacities of the Yiddish lan-
guage and the validity of Yiddish literature were Jews themselves,
among them some who used the language every day and loved it
dearly.

The orthodox were quite right, from their vantage point, to look
with suspicion on the rise of a literature which, by its very nature,
