Introduction 13

had to be secular in character—a literature that in the pioneering
fictions of Mendele and Sholem Aleichem, as in the early poems of
Perets and Abraham Reisen, dealt not with biblical figures or
legends, not with redemptive visions of the future, but with the
wretched little shtet! of the here-and-now, sometimes satirized and
sometimes celebrated, or dealt with commonplace dairymen, mar-
riage brokers, and women selling fish in the marketplace. The Yid-
dish writer Isaac Bashevis Singer has recalled that his father “‘con-
sidered all the secular writers to be heretics, all unbelievers—they
really were, too, most of them.” But finally it wasn’t even a ques-
tion of whether this or the other Yiddish writer was an unbeliever,
for what threatened traditional Jewish ways was the fact that the
writing and reading of modern fiction and verse was often con-
sidered an irrevocable step into the modern secular world.

In the minds of the early Yiddish writers, the right to create
imaginative literature was closely related to a defense of the
language in which they wrote: again, an anomaly. Over the cen-
turies Yiddish had accumulated an extremely rich deposit of idiom,
proverb, legend, story, joke, and song, as if it were all waiting for
literary use. The language of the streets could not simply be tran-
scribed in poem or novel; it had to be transformed, yet with the
essence of its strength preserved. By contrast, Hebrew, for all the
veneration accorded it and perhaps because of this veneration, was
for some Jewish young men and women aspiring to be writers
another language, perhaps known but almost certainly distant,
fixed into the molds of tradition but without the living substance
that only daily use can provide. Early modern Hebrew poetry writ-
ten in eastern Europe at this time tends to be overloaded with gran-
diose rhetoric, whereas the Yiddish work of Mendele and Sholem
Aleichem is rich with the earthy flavors, the street aromas of com-
mon speech.

Yet many of the Yiddish writers, even as they were creating the
elements of modern literary Yiddish, still felt a decided uneasiness
about it. They would turn back intermittently to Hebrew; Sholem
Aleichem wrote Hebrew stories and used Russian in letters to his
family; Perets, who in his youth tried to write Polish verse and did
publish Hebrew poetry, wryly noted the paucity of language for
romantic love in Yiddish. Shimon Frug, another early poet who
came to Yiddish from Russian poetry, compared the language to
