Introduction 15

Abraham Reisen seem like sparkling mirrors to their lives, while
Yiddish poetry, rarely if ever able to gain a mass audience, must
undertake the difficult task of training a corps of qualified readers.

In these years, which constitute what Yiddish literary historians
call ‘‘the classical period’ of the literature, a new love for the
language emerges—or perhaps it is not really new, but rather a
readiness to acknowledge an old feeling. Casting about for usable
materials and manageable forms, the Yiddish writers turn back to
the Yiddish folk tradition, and groups of folklorists emerge, among
them the dramatist 5S. Ansky, atithor of The Dybbuk,. These
folklorists tour the towns and villages of Russia and Poland col-
lecting stories, songs, jokes, and legends. Yiddish poetry would
soon be drawing heavily from folk sources, in the lyrics, for exam-
ple, of Abraham Reisen, some of which are put to music and
become as well known to the Yiddish public as folk songs. Later,
more sophisticated poets, like Mani Leyb and Itsik Manger, also
draw heavily upon both the minstrel and folk sources. Before this
conscious transformation by the poets, there had appeared for a
while popular Yiddish minstrels—figures like Velvl Zbarzher,
Eliakum Zunser, and the group called Di Broder Zinger (The
Singers of Brody)—who drew upon folk materials, improvised
satiric and sentimental verses of their own, and sometimes com-
mented in rhyme on public events. These popular minstrels took
over in part the tradition of the badkhn, or marriage entertainer,
who at weddings cuts up a little with formulaic and improvised
ditties.

When a group of young Yiddish writers, most of whom begin
publishing at the turn of the century, starts meeting at the Warsaw
home of Perets, one of their pleasures is to sing Yiddish folk songs
which their grandparents had sung as a matter of course. There
even arises in both eastern Europe and America an organized Yid-
dishist movement to defend the value and establish the norms of
the language. In 1908—at a time when Yiddish creativity is in full
bloom and some of the masterpieces of the pioneering trio of Yid-
dish writers have already appeared—a need is still felt for a con-
ference in Czernowitz to proclaim the “status and rights” of Yid-
dish. Such leading writers as Perets, Reisen, and Sholem Asch at-
tend and solemnly endorse a declaration: ‘The first conference
devoted to the Yiddish language recognizes Yiddish as a national
