16 Introduction

tongue, the language of the Jewish people, and demands for it
political, communal, and cultural equality.” Yiddish may still be
seen by some Jews as a stepchild, but it soon becomes a stepchild to
be petted and adored. :

Indeed, for many Yiddish poets, the language—its problematic
status, its extreme plasticity, its intimacy and charm—became a
central preoccupation. As with much modern poetry, Yiddish
never ceased to be its own subject, one poet—Zishe Landau—for
example, writing a poem about the silent letter heys and the miss-
ing letter ayens thanks to the standardization of Yiddish
orthography.

Yet the relationship between Yiddish and Hebrew must always
be a complex one, sometimes amiable, sometimes tense. The two
languages share an alphabet. Since its beginnings, Yiddish has
been distinguished by its Hebrew-Aramaic component, the most
important and easily recognizable. In the eyes of many scholars,
Hebrew and Yiddish form a linguistic and cultural continuity. Yid-
dish literary critics have often spoken of “two languages, one
literature’’—an exaggeration, to be sure, since Yiddish and Hebrew
literatures have taken different paths, but an understandable and
even fruitful exaggeration.

Many of the Yiddish writers whose work began to appear
around the turn of the century still wrote in both languages as a
matter of course. Mendele, for example, started writing in Hebrew
in the late 1850s, turned to Yiddish in 1863—4, translated from
Hebrew into Yiddish, and in the 1890s undertook the substantial
task of putting his Yiddish fictions into Hebrew. One of his novels,
Dos Vinshfingerl, was begun in Yiddish, a portion of which he
then translated into Hebrew; later he continued in Yiddish and
finished it in Hebrew. With another novel, Di Kliatshe, things are
still more complicated. Mendele wrote it first in Yiddish, made con-
siderable changes when translating it into Hebrew, and then, when
editing his collected writings, reworked the text in Yiddish to make
it conform to the Hebrew version.

For someone like Mendele, who lived entirely within the con-
fines of the Jewish world, this linguistic shuttling was natural and
easy. For the Hebrew poet Khayim Nakhman Bialik, who grew up
in eastern Europe and later migrated to Palestine, the problem of
language was more troublesome. Until 1899 Bialik wrote entirely in
