Introduction 17

Hebrew. That year he sent a Yiddish poem to a literary magazine
with the following remarks:

I must confess that it is easier to convey the subtle childhood yearn-
ings, the childhood of the ghetto and the heder, in “jargon” [Yid-
dish], that is, the language in which they were first experienced,
than to convey them in “the holy tongue’ [Hebrew]. Several times I
tried to do this in “the holy tongue” and it didn’t work out, while I
see that in “jargon” I can manage it.

If you wanted to render the realities of a shtet! childhood, sug-
gesting the flavor of life as experienced by a Jewish boy in eastern
Europe, then you were likely to feel constrained in Hebrew and
would turn back to Yiddish. Which didn’t, however, keep Bialik in
the very same letter from delivering a curse upon Yiddish!

In poetry the relationship between the two languages was of
course more complex than in prose, since a writer translating his
poem from, say, Yiddish to Hebrew had necessarily to take greater
liberties with diction and meter, sometimes creating a virtually new
poem. Such important poets as Uri Tsvi Greenberg, Aaron Zeitlin,
and Gabriel Preil have written in both languages, sometimes mak-
ing it almost impossible to say whether a given poem is an adapta-
tion from a poem in the other language or a genuinely fresh work.

Yiddish poetry is suffused with borrowings from and references
to traditional biblical texts and linked commentaries. At least until
recently, Yiddish poets could take it for granted that anyone
reading their work in the original would understand such
references, just as Melville could still take it for granted that literate
Americans who might pick up Moby Dick would immediately
register the associations he wished to make by naming some of his
characters Ahab, Ishmael, Elijah, and Bildad.

Even among poets writing in Yiddish after the First World War
—poets often strongly under the influence of one or another
modernist outlook the power of these traditional Hebraic associa-
tions remained visible. Consider, for example, Perets Markish, an
enormously talented Soviet Yiddish poet and a self-avowed mod-
ernist. His poetry contains a strong component of Hebrew, as well
as quotations from and allusions to Hebrew texts. Di Kupe (The
Mound), a long poem (page 352), is an expressionist cry of rage
and despair over a 1920 pogrom in the Ukraine, but it is rich with
