18 Introduction

imagery and language taken from the Hebrew-Aramaic prayers,
sometimes used as direct statement, more often for sarcastic jux-
taposition. In his youth Markish had been assistant to a cantor and
learned entire passages of cantorial chanting by heart; in later
years, when typing out his poems, he would hum these cantorial
melodies to himself—as if to dramatize the tension between the
two halves of his sensibility.

Another Soviet Yiddish poet, Shmuel Halkin, went back to a
traditional allusion in order to reinforce a subtly critical point in his
poem ‘‘Russia” (page 512). Composed in 1923, the poem con-
stitutes a pledge of support for the new Soviet order: “we” are
yours “‘to the end of our lives.’’ Yet even as “we have fallen in step
with you,” Halkin registers in the final line a gentle demurrer—
“Though of your kisses we die.” A reader who takes the poem at
face value can recognize that Halkin is indicating a painful am-
bivalence about his own pledge of support. But a Yiddish reader
with a modest Hebraic background would also know about the
midrash containing the legend that when Moses at the end of his
life rebelled against the idea of death, God summoned him to
heaven with a kiss. The mixture of pledge and demurrer contained
in Halkin’s poem echoes, in both tragic and ironic ways, the mix-
ture of love and rebellion in Moses’s relation to God. An earlier
poet might have put the last line in Hebrew, taking it over intact
from the sources; but Halkin chose to translate it into Yiddish,
perhaps because he knew the Soviet authorities took a dim view of
Hebrew references, perhaps because he still trusted his readers to
hear the echo, and perhaps because he feared that too many
readers, no longer having a firm Hebraic education, would not hear
the echo unless it were put into Yiddish.

The constant overshadowing by Hebrew gave Yiddish writers a
seemingly inexhaustible supply of anecdote, imagery, moral ex-
emplum; it provided them with standard devices for spiritual and
rhetorical elevation, a simple poem or story becoming “enlarged”
through a phrase about Isaac receiving the blessing, Jacob wres-
tling with the angel, Elijah solacing the poor. But this rich load of
traditional material could also make for mechanical dependence,
even a lazy exploitation and sentimentality. (The writer Joseph
Opatashu once spoke about the way in Yiddish fiction and verse
“the trees swayed too often in afternoon prayer, the sky was too
