Introduction 19

often enveloped in a prayer shawl.”) Precisely this awareness that
the Hebraic traditional past loomed so powerfully would lead some
of the modernist Yiddish writers to seek a protective distance, in
order to establish their own identities and styles.

When we turn to the relations between Yiddish poetry and the
literatures of Europe and the United States, we enter less secure
ground. There are kinships and influences but the exact nature of
these remains somewhat uncertain.

No one is likely to doubt that such major literary impulses as
romanticism and modernism find parallels in Yiddish. The impor-
tant group of Yiddish poets called Di Yunge (The Young Ones)
whose work starts to be published in New York about 1907, shows
many traces of European neo-romanticism. Di Khaliastre (The
Gang), a short-lived but vital literary group making its appearance
in Warsaw in 1922, has strong kinships with the expressionist
poetry being written in Europe at the time. Yet a deeper acquain-
tance with Yiddish poetry is likely to suggest the presence of a
strong distinctiveness. Yiddish poetry may develop in compressed
parallel to the poetries of Europe and America, but it always
keeps—perhaps always must keep—at a certain distance from
them. The sense of being linked to a special history, the moral
stresses and verbal tonalities carried over from the Hebrew, and the
strong attachment felt by Yiddish writers to the immigrant and
working-class publics: these are but a few of the reasons Yiddish
writing must find its own ways. One Yiddish poet may seem to
echo Baudelaire and another Esenin; one may seem to be in-
fluenced by the broad strophes of Whitman and another by Robert
Frost’s pastoralism; but almost always these turn out, on close in-
spection, to be similarities more than traceable influences. And
often enough they are similarities of a surface nature. When Yid-
dish modernist poets, for example, began to write in the 1920s,
brushing aside traditional themes and metrics, they would
sometimes fall a few steps short of the full modernist stance. Being
Yiddish poets, they could not quite enjoy the luxuries of complete
aesthetic autonomy or carefree playfulness or anarchic rebellion.
They could not quite give themselves over to the view that poetry
makes earlier poetry its central subject matter. And even when they
