 

20 Introduction

did approach such attitudes and sentiments, it was briefly, hes-
itantly, as a phase of their youth.

Still, certain influences can be indicated with reasonable as-
surance. In the formative years of east European Yiddish poetry,
say between 1890 and 1914, such Russian and German writers as
Lermontov and Heine had a considerable impact on Yiddish
poetry.* Especially is this true of Heine, whose blend of the sar-
donic and sentimental, perhaps taken to be distinctively “Jewish,”
can be detected in the lyrics of Abraham Reisen. We know also that
in New York Di Yunge published in their several magazines a great
deal of European poetry translated into Yiddish, and if this trans-
lation did not directly influence their work it certainly helped them
escape the grip of the earlier social didacticism that had dominated
Yiddish poetry. Similarly, it seems clear that the violent futurism
of Mayakovsky left a mark on the work of the Yiddish expres-
sionist Perets Markish, and that the nostalgia for the village per-
vading the poems of Esenin left visible marks on the poetry of the
Yiddish Soviet poet Izi Kharik.

But can we be quite certain? Kharik’s nostalgia for the old 1
was deeply imbedded in the feelings of many secular Jews of the
1920s, both in the United States and Europe; it was shared,
sometimes in perversely ironic ways, by the gifted Yiddish poet
Moyshe-Leyb Halpern, in New York. Again, there seem to be dis-
tinct similarities of voice and tone between the pastoral poems of
Robert Frost and some of Joseph Rolnik’s Yiddish poems, or
between the modernist poems of Wallace Stevens and some of
Gabriel Preil’s Yiddish poems. But whether this amounts to a
demonstrable influence is still, in our minds, a question.

Perhaps, for the moment, it is enough to say that there are two
basic mistakes to be avoided: the first, taking a patronizing view of
Yiddish poetry, sees all its trends and developments as mere reflec-
tions of what has occurred in Western literature. The second

“Yet even these obvious influences were resented and resisted. In 1907 Perets
wrote a letter to another Yiddish poet, Yehoash, which sums up the often am-
bivalent feelings that Yiddish poets had about poets of other cultures. Yehoash’s
“romances,” wrote Perets, smelled of Heine: “I cursed the days when I read
[Heine] and the pieces in which I copied him. His ingenious clowning is after all
no more than impotence . . . in the best of cases, self-loathing. We dare not joke
around. . . . Let us be prophets and leaders not jesters.””
