Introduction 1

locks Yiddish poetry into a closet of parochialism, treating it as en-
tirely self-generated and self-sufficient. The truth is more complex,
difficult, and problematic.

A Historical Sketch

The brief history of modern Yiddish literature is crowded with
literary groups, schools, and tendencies; but their role in that
history is not quite what conventional literary historians might
make it seem—indeed, the role of such groups in any literature
may not quite be what conventional historians make it seem.

Most of the Yiddish literary groups were short-lived and evanes-
cent, and their importance had rather less to do with their declared
principles than with the need of young writers to huddle together
against the indifference of the general public and the hostility of
older writers. Di Yunge, a group that began to cohere in 1907, had
a fairly well-developed aesthetic program—essentially a demand
that writers be free to write as they wished, out of personal feelings
and apart from social programs or communal (Jewish-national)
obligations; but even there what held these writers together for a
number of years was essentially a shared rejection of previous
literary modes. Once they had succeeded in breaking the
dominance of the earlier social-national poets, Di Yunge began to
disintegrate, with some of its supporters taking literary paths
sharply different from those of the group’s central figures. The im-
portant poet H. Leivick was an early ally of Di Yunge, sharing their
distaste for didactic or ideological verse; but, not sharing their
aestheticist creed or sensibility, he soon went his own way.

Other Yiddish literary groups were, if anything, still more
amorphous. Consider the case of Di Khaliastre, the modernist
group that appeared in Poland during the early 1920s and is com-
monly regarded by Yiddish literary historians as an extremely im-
portant development in the literature. Important it certainly is, but
only symptomatically, as a sign of changing outlooks among the
Yiddish poets, and not as any sort of stable literary group or
school. The poet Uri Tsvi Greenberg, associated with Di Khaliastre,
once told an editor of this anthology that the group had really kept
together for less than a year, was fairly casual even during that
year, and was linked more by generational sensibility and com-
radeship than by worked-out principles.
