22 Introduction

It should not be hard to understand why many Yiddish writers
tended briefly to huddle together in groups or “gangs.” Even a
Yiddish poet starting to write in the 1920s, when the literature was
in full bloom, had behind him only a thin and fragile tradition—no
more than one or two generations of earlier Yiddish writers to
acknowledge as models or mentors or even as figures to oppose.
Becoming a Yiddish poet was still a somewhat lonely and perilous
venture, sometimes leading onto the path of alienation and dis-
belief, often to a life of poverty. If by now the idea of being a poet
was honored within small circles of Yiddish intellectuals and
educated readers, it often met with suspicion and even scorn
among both religious circles and ordinary people. Suppose you
came to Kiev in 1912 or New York in 1908 or even Warsaw in 1922,
straight from the shtedl in which you had been born or the yeshiva
in which you were recently studying. You hoped to emblazon your
name across the Jewish literary horizon but soon learned that this
was likely to entail poverty, loneliness, and isolation. It was only
natural to want the company of others who were also dreaming of
composing the great Yiddish epics and lyrics, and who felt equally
lonely and neglected. Soon this led to common bonds, daring
manifestos, shared positions. But once the poems of the young
writers actually got into print, it became clear, for example, that
Mani Leyb, the central figure of Di Yunge, had little in common
with Moyshe-Leyb Halpern or H. Leivick, two important poets
who had circled around the group during its formative period.
Poets in such groups started combative and short-lived magazines,
fought common enemies, gave each other moral support; but as
they grew more confident and gained a bit of a reputation, they
began to feel stronger and more independent. They had come
together in order to move apart.

It was in the United States, during the last two decades of the
nineteenth century, that the first major group or school of Yiddish
poets made its appearance—the pioneering “sweatshop” or labor
poets whose work now seems of greater historical interest than
literary value. In their calls to social activism, often set to stirring
music and sung by thousands of Yiddish-speaking immigrant
workers, and in their poignant evocations of the misery, waste, and
