Introduction 23

loneliness of the early immigrant generations in America, these
poets played an important part in the social history of American
Jews. If only because they wrote verses that appeared in the Yid-
dish press and periodicals, they also played an important part in
the history of Yiddish literature. In the main, they were not
middle-class ideologues speaking for or to the masses; they had
arisen organically out of Jewish working-class life, sharing its
ordeals, hopes, and limitations. If ever there have been genuine
proletarian writers, it was these poets—especially figures like
Dovid Edelshtat and Morris Rosenfeld.

During the last two decades of the nineteenth century, the
Jewish immigrant community experienced multiple traumas. It had
been uprooted from traditional life in eastern Europe. It had un-
dergone the pain of long journeys to America. It had been sub-
jected to a cruel and enforced urbanization and proletarianization.
And in America it had to confront a culture, largely Protestant, that
seemed strange and hard to understand. The conditions of life for
most of these early immigrants were wretched; their cultural level
was low; and, most damaging of all, their sense of cohesion as part
of the Jewish people had been damaged. Once the radical Yiddish
poets began to print their verses of anger and pathos in the left-
wing Yiddish papers, they were quickly seen by many immigrants
as spokesmen and defenders. In the crude but effective verses these
Yiddish poets turned out, they spoke to the immigrants’ bewilder-
ment, hurt, resentment—above all, their desolation. When trans-
lated into another language, these poems are likely to seem little
more than propagandistic and sentimental—which is why we have
chosen not to include most of the sweatshop poets in this
anthology. But if read in their own language and with a sense of
historical context, some of these poems can still be moving. They
are not the manufactured agitprop verses of the kind that appeared
in the 1930s; they are genuine expressions of the folk.

The line that Western culture draws between the social and the
cultural was one that could scarcely be maintained in the im-
migrant quarters of those years. Barely educated or ill-educated
workers were struggling, first, for survival and then for a minimal
articulation. As soon as these Yiddish-speaking immigrants won
a crust of bread for themselves, they sought to improvise some
sort of cultural life, even though they were largely cut off from
their east European origins and had only meager resources of their
