24 Introduction

own. A sympathetic Yiddish critic, B. Rivkin, writes about their
strivings:

They sought in literature the same thing they wanted in a news-
paper: a way of becoming somewhat less of a ““greenhorn,” a way of
escaping a little from their loneliness. And when poem and story
gave them a certain enlightenment about mankind in general, the
greenhorns began to feel they were becoming a little Americanized.
... They began to search out the “literary evening” which offered
poetry readings and storytelling and would soon become a major folk
institution. And then the newspaper brought the “literary evening”
directly into their homes.

Morris Winchevsky, the senior figure among these poets, per-
sonified in his long life the transition from Haskalah enlighten-
ment to Jewish socialism. Well educated in traditional Jewish
themes, he nevertheless chose to write declamatory political odes
and satiric gibes at the immigrant Jewish communities of London
and New York. For a time he was immensely popular among the
working-class elements in these communities; but notwithstanding
a certain forcefulness of expression, Winchevsky must be judged a
writer of his moment, little more than a talented journalist in verse.
Dovid Edelshtat lived out his brief life—he died at the age of
twenty-six—as a fervent anarchist who had been raised on Russian
romantic poetry and then turned to Yiddish, a language he had
first to learn, because he wished to rouse his people to revolt.
“Even his nightingale,” remarks B. Rivkin, “sang anarchist
proclamations.” These proclamations may by now seem worn, but
beneath their political surface there remains the sense of being lost
that overwhelmed the early immigrants. As with other writers,
Edelshtat left us not what he intended to but what he felt most
deeply. :

The most important of these sweatshop poets was Morris
Rosenfeld, in the late 1890s and early 1900s the dominant poet of
the immigrant Jewish quarter in New York. A man of flamboyant
temperament inclined to lapses into depression, Rosenfeld wrote
with rage, confusion, more than a touch of self-pity. Less explicitly
political than Winchevsky or Edelshtat, he managed to bring
together both socialist and national-Jewish sentiments——a mixture
