Introduction 25

not easy to define or defend abstractly but very much part of im-
migrant sensibility. In one of his most famous poems, “My Little
Boy,” Rosenfeld described how, as a garment worker, he went to
work too early and came home too late to see his son awake—

The time clock drags me off at dawn;
at night it lets me go,
I hardly know my flesh and blood,
his eyes I hardly know.

Aaron Kramer

When he wrote about himself as a machine tied to other once-
human machines in the sweatshop, Rosenfeld stirred the emotions
of his Yiddish readers as no mere rhetorical exhortation possibly
could. Later Yiddish poets, seeking literary autonomy and the
privilege of a personal voice, found it difficult to maintain an ob-
jective attitude toward Rosenfeld. But even the iconoclast Moyshe-
Leyb Halpern, who appeared on the Yiddish literary scene
somewhat later than Rosenfeld, had to admit, ‘Rosenfeld is in the
blood of every one of us.” The curve of Rosenfeld’s career reached
a high point in the brief acceptance he won in American literary
circles, when his poems were translated into English, and a sad
conclusion when in his later years he felt himself attacked and dis-
missed by the younger Yiddish poets.

Equally close to the common reader, though in origin and style
rather less a man of the folk, was the poet Abraham Reisen,
perhaps the first major lyricist in modern Yiddish. Drawing heavi-
ly upon Yiddish folk songs, though also influenced by Nekrasov‘s
romanticism and Heine’s romantic irony, Reisen usually employed
simple rhyme schemes and a four-beat metric. He wrote hundreds
of short poems, a good many of which would be set to music, as
well as hundreds of stories, really the lightest pencil sketches, in
which the shtetl and, sometimes, immigrant life are portrayed with
a mild, fluent economy. In Reisen’s work an important strand of
Yiddish sensibility found its home—the strand of anti-heroism, re-
jecting grand rhetoric and celebrating, instead, the little man, less
for his wisdom than his kindliness and endurance.

There is no Sturm und Drang in Reisen, only the bittersweet
remembrance of passions spent, hopes exhausted, ideals smashed.
