Introduction 27

Everything in Reisen’s lyrics—tone, diction, thought—is un-
mistakably his own, and often he writes in the first-person
singular. Yet his voice is not quite that distinctively individual one,
that intimately personal one, for which the slightly younger Yid-
dish poets will soon be striving. The “I’’ of his poetry is still a
generic ‘’I,” the voice of a culture at least as much as the voice of a
man. Now, decades later, as that culture has begun to fade into the
past, Reisen’s poems—delicate, thin, gently bringing together the
sweet and the tart—take on a representative character that this
modest poet could hardly have supposed they would ever have.

The years 1907—9 formed a major turning point in the history of
Yiddish poetry. In Vilna there appeared the important though
short-lived Literarishe monatshriftn, a literary magazine notable
for its insistence that Yiddish literature merited attention in its own
right, quite apart from whether it contributed to any ideology. And
also important for the growth of Yiddish poetry, there began to ap-
pear in New York during the winter of 1907—8 a distinctively
modern poetry, written by the group of young immigrants called
Di Yunge.

Though influenced of course by earlier Yiddish poetry, especial-
ly the lyrics of Reisen, Di Yunge set as their immediate goal to
effect a sharp break in Yiddish literary life. The leading poets in
this group were Mani Leyb, Zishe Landau, and Reuven Ayzland,
though for a time other important poets, such as Joseph Rolnik,
Moyshe-Leyb Halpern, and H. Leivick, circled around the group.
What Di Yunge wanted most—in the overcharged atmosphere of
immigrant Jewish life—was some cultural space in which to
breathe, some freedom to develop literary skills regardless of
traditional constraints or social obligations. Di Yunge refused the
burdens of political activism; they rejected the notion that Yiddish
poets had a duty to speak for a collective ethos; they wished to see
Yiddish literature treated as an end in itself. Less programmatically
but at least as significantly, they chose for themselves a path of
modesty. It was as if they were saying to Yiddish writers, Let’s put
an end to high-flown rhetoric, let’s write for individual readers
rather than communal gatherings, let’s dig into defensive positions
behind our ephemeral little magazines rather than submit to the
heavy hand of the Yiddish press. One of Mani Leyb’s loveliest
