 

28 Introduction

poems, Shtiler, shtiler (translated as ‘Hush and hush—no sound
be heard” on p. 124), is a plea for a poetry of mildness and modula-
tion; but since Di Yunge could not quite escape the communal
burdens they hoped to cast off, the poem is also a muted celebra-
tion of Jewish resignation.

Aestheticism—the view that artistic beauty is a self-sufficient
standard—was their formal creed. In a famous wisecrack, Zishe
Landau remarked that, until the appearance of Di Yunge, Yiddish
poetry had been “the rhyme department of the Jewish labor
movement.” But now, said these young writers, it was not subser-
vient to any external idea or agency; it would content itself for
subject matter with the “small’’ experiences of life—a glimpse of
personal pleasure, a fleeting mood, an incident at home. ‘‘We suf-
fer,” observed the caustic Landau, “from an epidemic of profound
subject matter. It is considered a scandal to wife and child if we so
much as treat an ordinary event.”

This creed was very much at odds with traditional Judaism,
which could find no place for secular imaginative art, and also with
the expectations of newly emancipated Jews, who were beginning
to look to literature for ethical and social guidance. By insisting on
sensibility rather than social ideology as the ultimate arbiter of
value, these Yiddish poets often cut themselves off from their own
community, since not many Yiddish readers of the time had the
intellectual sophistication or emotional ease that was needed to
sympathize with their outlook. The rebellion of Di Yunge was ex-
pressed, so to say, in two voices, one of them ironic, even sardonic,
especially in the writings of Zishe Landau, and the other with a
prophetic intensity that seemed to bow to the very tradition it was
rejecting. Thus the poet H. Leivick wrote in 1918, “I am sick to my
stomach of ... the diaspora themes, the shoyfer peals and the
shtetl stories. I am bored by Hasidic tunes, folksy sing-songs,
clerical sonnets.” Indeed, from the time of Di Yunge onward, es-
pecially in the United States, Yiddish poets could rarely command
the mass audiences that their predecessors had and that some Yid-
dish prose writers still could. The appearance of the group marks
the start of a “minority culture” in Yiddish.

Three quarters of a century later there is still something
remarkable and touching in the sight of these young writers, im-
migrants forced to labor in the shops quite like other immigrants,
