Introduction 29

who speak fervently in behalf of aesthetic autonomy and turn
eagerly to the recent masterpieces of European modernism. In the
tenements of the Lower East Side they read a good many of the new
European poets, Russians like Bryusov and Blok, Germans like
Rilke and Hofmannsthal, French like Baudelaire and Verlaine,
sometimes in the original, sometimes in translation. Their
magazines were filled with translations from European languages.
Nor was the fragility—indeed, the pathos—of their own situation
lost on them. In a letter that Mani Leyb wrote many years later to a
younger Yiddish poet, he said:

An immigrant, I brought with me native landscapes, ideals of
socialism, humanism, and vague artistic views derived from the
German Romantics and French symbolists via Russian writers. . . .
Lost in the factory, in poverty, without time to write—what could I
do? But the little I gave is mine.

These poets were never quite at ease with American culture and
society. During their formative years, the Yiddish subculture of
New York was so vital and encompassing that they could readily
live out their entire imaginative lives within it. America entered
their work, especially the fictions of the prose writers, as a new and
strange place—a new home uneasily glimpsed and partially ac-
cepted. (The narrator of a story by David Ignatoff, a stalwart of Di
Yunge, goes off to work ona farm in Vermont: “I decided to accept
a Christian employer. ... And I was tempted by a passion to
deliver myself into the hands of these new liberators of ours.’’) In
the cityscapes of poets like Mani Leyb and Moyshe-Leyb Halpern,
New York becomes a cosmopolitan maelstrom filled with deafening
noise, unceasing motion, and chilling impersonality. Yet for almost
all of them the pull of the old world continued to be strong, even
when, as in the poems of Moyshe-Leyb Halpern, it was tinged with
hatred. And once these writers felt the pressure of such historical
events as the First World War and the Russian Revolution, they
harked back still more strongly to the old world. Remaining im-
migrants, they started to feel like exiles. Zishe Landau, whose
earlier poems had been ironic and debonair, now wrote a pas-
sionate poem of remembrance:
