 

30 Introduction

For every Jewish dirty lane,

I weep and mourn for every shop.
For every tavern, pawn shop, inn
for our false weight and measure. .

For everything that was ours
and now vanishes with the smoke.

The distance these Yiddish poets felt from American culture was
all but inescapable: they could never be at home with the English
language or American literature. Nor could they really live by their
own creed as fully as they might have wished, since, finally, no
Yiddish writer could long remain a pure aesthete.

Nevertheless, Di Yunge had an enormous impact on Yiddish
writing. The need for a distinctive literary milieu, the effort to
catch up with other literatures in mood, theme, and technique, the
creation of magazines that would escape the vulgarities of the Yid-
dish press and the limitations of the larger Yiddish audiences—all
began with Di Yunge. And one of the most interesting conse-
quences of their appearance in the Yiddish world was that young
women—assertive, combative, witty—began to appear on the
scene as writers. Poets like Anna Margolin and Celia Dropkin
started to publish in the New York journals of Di Yunge, writing of
their feelings as women, sometimes with a sexual candor that ex-
ceeded anything to be found in the work of the male poets and that
succeeded in shocking many Yiddish readers.

Di Yunge were innovators in some respects, conventional in
others. In prosody they remained largely bound to the modes of
European romantic and symbolist poetry, but with regard to
language they were far bolder. Especially in the verse of Mani
Leyb, who over the years would be the most faithful to the original
views of the group, there occurs a purification and stabilization of
the language as a literary medium, a sloughing off of both jour-
nalistic scrappiness and daytshmerish, or the pompous Ger-
manisms earlier poets had liked to affect. Historically considered,
this is a major contribution of Di Yunge to the development of
Yiddish poetry.

A number of elements persist in the work of these poets: a
readiness, especially in Landau’s verse, to deal matter-of-factly
with daily life; a reliance upon evocative symbols rather than ex-
