Introduction 1

plicit statement; a fondness for musicality, with a stress on sound
patterns and oral effects; an emphasis on personal feeling and sub-
jectivity, so that the ““I’’ starts to appear in their poetry, if not yet
with the full force it will have in twentieth-century modernist
literature.

Among these poets, the romantic Mani Leyb achieved the most
refined and melodious effects. He was a figure of a kind that has
usually been more important in European and Yiddish than in
American literary life: a “poetic personality.” Bringing together a
love for Pushkin and the Yiddish folk song, Mani Leyb wrote
lyrics adhering, as he said, “to the principle of strict word choice.”
Employing conventional rhymed quatrains, he wrote out of a per-
suasion that “beauty” is something graspable, self-contained, and
to be achieved through a modulated interplay of image and idea.
His poems can now seem a little thin, but they are marked by the
charm of a poet who sought “amid our gray days of hard physical
labor at the sewing machines” the blessings of aesthetic com-
posure. It was in the sonnets he wrote at the end of his life that
Mani Leyb best fulfilled himself—sonnets still marked by a
characteristic verbal refinement but richer in feeling, more complex
in language than his earlier lyrics. In these sonnets, one senses a
distinctive Jewish sensibility, that of the aging immigrant who
looks back upon his life with some wisdom and still more regret,
strongly aware that circumstances have imposed severe depriva-
tions yet now taking a final glance of pleasure at the physical
world.

Two other important poets should be mentioned here—H.
Leivick and Moyshe-Leyb Halpern—who began for a little while
with Di Yunge and then went their own ways.

Leivick was a strained, visionary figure, deeply Jewish in his
commitments yet with a sensibility that in retrospect appears to
have similarities to a “primitive Christianity” stressing passive en-
durance. As a young man he had suffered imprisonment in Siberia
for his socialist activity, and after arriving in the United States in
1913 he contracted tuberculosis. He was forced to spend several
years in a Denver sanitorium. Between personal experience and
poetic sensibility there was an intimate link. Obsession with mar-
tyrdom, the scrutiny and even celebration of pain, a hunger for
revelation or perhaps only apocalypse—all are strong motifs in
