 

32 Introduction

Leivick’s poetry. In one of his long poems he writes, “Blessed be
the man of suffering / Who calls God Himself to judgment.” For a
time Leivick stood at the center of Yiddish literary culture, even
though some critics attacked his outlook as ‘masochistic’ and
heretical. With the coming of the Holocaust, he entered periods of
anguished silence, though to some readers it seemed as if he had
been tragically vindicated. Hard to render in another language, not
so much for linguistic as for cultural reasons, his poems occupy a
significant place in Yiddish literature.

“Help me, O God,” Moyshe-Leyb Halpern once wrote, ‘‘to spit
on the world and on you and on myself.” This voice of turmoil and
self-disgust, of romantic anti-romanticism, of modernist impre-
cation—“poet and anti-poet,” as a Yiddish critic called him—is
perhaps the most powerful in the entire history of Yiddish poetry.
A master of grotesque playfulness, consumed in his weaker poems
by demons of self-pity, sustained in his stronger poems by a mor-
dant imagination cauterizing every falsity he sees in himself and
others, the poet takes on the distanced persona of Moyshe-Leyb
the rascal, a lost urban creature, full of nostalgia for the old
country, full of contempt for his nostalgia. The drama of his poems
is essentially the drama of a riven self, and out of it he makes some
wonderfully abrasive and cunning poems. Though a friend of
Mani Leyb, he cares nothing for the latter’s smoothness and mel-
lifluousness; he writes in a style of nervous imprecation, he shouts,
curses, cries out. Nothing solaces him, nothing calms him, even
though at times his voice can drop to a croon or whisper. Moyshe-
Leyb Halpern is the great original of Yiddish poetry, brother to the
modernist masters of Europe, a lonely soul in the immigrant streets
of New York.

From the start of the First World War, the main thrust of Yiddish
poetry for the next quarter of a century will be toward the modern-
ist visions and styles which had, by now, come to dominate Euro-
pean literature: toward these visions and styles, but seldom quite
reaching or staying with them.

We use the term “modernism” here in its most general sense, to
include the many literary tendencies—symbolism, futurism, ex-
pressionism, surrealism, etc.—that, often through internal con-
