Introduction 3

flicts, have comprised the modernist impulse in the twentieth cen-
tury. A rough simplification: Modernism has come to signify a
complex of thematic and stylistic innovations which signify the
abandonment of transcendent beliefs and moral absolutes,
traditional systems of thought and sentiments of life, whether
religious, philosophical, social, or moral. Modernism takes it for
granted that in such a time serious people must adopt a strongly
problematic stance toward human existence, a persuasion that the
true home of sensibility is with questions, not answers. Modernism
often entails formal experimentation with genres, structures,
meters, and diction, as a way of finding modes of expression ap-
propriate for an age of doubt and anxiety.

The rise of a modernist sensibility among Yiddish writers in the
years directly after the First World War had its sources both in the
inner development of Yiddish and the growing impact of the sur-
rounding European and (to a lesser extent) American cultures. But
an additional spur to the modernist impulse was the series of
catastrophes that beset Jewish life during the First World War
—the destruction of entire communities, the scapegoating of Jews
at the hands of rival armies, the horror of the Ukrainian po-
groms at the very moment when a “new age” of international
brotherhood was being announced. This uprooting of traditional
Jewish life meant that many young writers found themselves adrift
and therefore especially responsive to the creeds and values of
modernism.

The poetry that now began to emerge in Yiddish pulsed with
contradictions. Despair and anger, oaths and imprecations, un-
belief and obscurity, and eroticism sometimes bordering on the ex-
hibitionistic are among the features of these new modernist poems.
But there is also lyrical sensitivity, a nostalgia for the “obsolete”
shtetl, a continued return to distinctively Jewish images and as-
sociations. The tradition may be breaking up, but precisely among
those who recognize and even celebrate this, it still has an enor-
mous imaginative hold.

A major factor in propelling Yiddish poetry toward modernism
was the worldwide dispersion of the poets themselves. What had
only yesterday been a small chorus from the shtetl now became
the cacophony of an international literature, with important
centers in Warsaw, New York, Kiev, and Moscow. The inter-
