 

34 Introduction

nationalization of Yiddish literary life meant that cross influences
were strengthened and provincialisms subdued. To cite one or two
examples: The literary journal Literatur un lebn (Literature and
Life), published for a number of years before the First World War,
was edited jointly by Yiddish writers in New York and Warsaw; it
was taken for granted that Yiddish literature cut across national
boundaries. An important Yiddish poet, Abraham Sutzkever,
presented himself in 1932 for “admission” to the literary group
Yung Vilne with a ballad about seven Kirghistan tribesmen who
compete for a wild beauty of the steppes. The young Vilna writers,
though street buddies of Sutzkever, refused to take him into their
group, then politically leftist in outlook, because his work seemed
to them too exotic. A while thereafter he published several poems
in In Zikh (Introspectivist, literally, Inside the Self), the magazine
of the group in New York, and as a consequence the Yiddish Pen
Club of Warsaw issued his first book of poems in 1937. There can-
not be many poets of our time whose work has undertaken so com-
plicated a journey.

One of the more important of these new literary groups began to
take shape in the Ukrainian city of Kiev in 1912—13. Leading
figures of the Kiev group were, in prose, Dovid Bergelson and Der
Nister (The Hidden One) and later, in poetry, Perets Markish,
Dovid Hofshteyn, and Leyb Kvitko. In ways somewhat akin to
those of Di Yunge in New York, these writers wished to move
beyond the earlier preoccupation of Yiddish fiction and poetry
with folk motifs and references and to break with the idyllic or
melancholy lyricism that had dominated Yiddish poetry in eastern
Europe till the First World War. After the revolution, the Yiddish
writers—their numbers greatly increased and their self-confidence
visibly strengthened—often chose to present themselves as sym-
pathizers to the new regime, though only a few poets, like Izi
Kharik and Itsik Fefer, were outright Communists. Perets
Markish, inspired by the excitements of the moment, declared the
new Yiddish poetry “a child of the Revolution with all its
qualities.” He felt that a new aesthetic was required: “The new
Yiddish poetry in revolutionary Russia has nothing more to learn
from the European lyric.”’
