Introduction 35

Until about 1924 there was a flowering of Yiddish poetry and prose
that paralleled in character and vivacity the flowering of Russian
poetry during the same years. Some of this verse had a decidedly
political bent, though it was not yet made to party order; there was
also an occasionally ambivalent rejection of both the religious and
the shtetl past. At least for writers who didn’t collide head-on with
the new regime, the atmosphere was still relatively free. Yiddish
cultural life in Russia during those years was intense, with
flourishing networks of secular Yiddish schools, theaters, publica-
tions, and research institutes. In the early 1920s, now and again,
Yiddish writers would go abroad, mainly to western Europe, but
most of them came back to the Soviet Union. By the end of the
1920s, however, there was a notable increase of harassment from
the commissars, and in the early 1930s the Soviet cultural
authorities started a preposterous campaign to rid Yiddish of its
“Hebrew component’”—which could only mean a crippling of the
language. The poet Dovid Hofshteyn, for example, felt obliged in
one of his poems to change the word for sunset from shkiye to
ovnt-randn, decidedly not an improvement.

Yiddish writers grew obsessed with the clash between Jewish
traditions and the revolutionary sentiments to which they tried to
adjust themselves. Older poets, like Markish and Hofshteyn, still
possessed a very considerable Jewish culture: they knew Hebrew
well, they could recite the prayers, and so on. Younger poets, like
Izi Kharik and Leyb Kvitko, were more cosmopolitan in outlook,
though even in their work one can detect motifs of ambivalent
nostalgia for the old Jewish world. Kharik’s “August” (page 530)
speaks to the shtetl in a voice of ambivalence:

Not long ago I cursed and railed at you,

And now, you lie before me, hushed.

I wander in a fume of fruit and blossom

And August lies transparent here, and cool.
Leonard Wolf

In 1922 some of the Kiev Yiddish writers, led by Dovid Hof-
shteyn and Aaron Kushnirov, published in Moscow a literary jour-
nal called Shtrom (Stream). Though it lasted only about three
years, Shtrom made a strong impression upon Yiddish readers both
