36 Introduction

in the Soviet Union and the West—for at that time there was a con-
siderable sympathy among Western Jews for both the Soviet Union
and its Yiddish literary contingent. What Shtrom made evident
was that, with alittle freedom, Yiddish literature could thrive in the
Soviet Union. Shtrom followed a cautious path, avoiding both
the banalities of “proletarian literature” and outright criticism
of the regime. The writers connected with Shtrom managed to link
their Jewish sensibilities and loyalties with a warm responsiveness
to the new society. How long this could have continued had the
Yiddish writers been left undisturbed, we can only speculate. No
writers in the Soviet Union were left undisturbed. Soon enough
Shtrom came under sharp attack from the Yiddish commissars,
who, perhaps to demonstrate their political loyalties, were some-
times more venomous than their Russian equivalents.

From the mid-twenties onward, the story of Soviet Yiddish
literature is a depressingly familiar one:* the writers kept strug-
gling to save a margin of autonomy, free from party dictate and
bureaucratic distemper. Yiddish poets, especially Hofshteyn
and Kvitko, were repeatedly attacked for ideological “deviations,”
and they had no choice but to recant. After a time, as the Yiddish
writers were forced to make ‘‘corrections’” in order to add a
“positive” note to their poems, their work began to lose its
freshness and individuality. As‘one Yiddish writer, Der Nister,
wrote to his brother in Paris, explaining why he had abandoned a
lifelong commitment to literary symbolism, “Here one has to turn
one’s soul upside down.”

In the late thirties two Yiddish poets, Izi Kharik and the im-
mensely talented Moyshe Kulbak, were arrested, disappearing into
prison camps from which they would never return. During the
Second World War there was a temporary respite, as the Yiddish
poets participated eagerly in the struggle against Hitlerism. But in
the end they could not escape the terror of Stalinism. Many Yid-
dish writers were arrested in the late forties and early fifties; and

“Details can be found in the introduction to Ashes Out of Hope, an anthology of
Soviet Yiddish fiction edited by Irving Howe and Eliezer Greenberg. A historical
account appears in the introduction by Khone Shmeruk in A shpigloyfa shteyn,a
memorial anthology of the Soviet Yiddish writers. A more detailed account is his
paper “Yiddish Literature in the U.S.S.R.” in The Jews in Soviet Russia Since
1917, ed. by Lionel Kochan,
