38 Introduction

Aaron Glants-Leyeles, took for granted. These new poets rebelled
against what they saw as the excessive mellifluousness of Di
Yunge, against their “soft romanticism and metrical conven-
tionality. The In Zikh poets wanted to write poems completely and
unequivocally personal; to evoke the bitter realities of Jewish ex-
perience; to venture in Yiddish upon the imagistic and free-verse
experiments which had begun in American poetry. Where Di
Yunge had been largely cut off from American literature, men like
Glatstein and Glants-Leyeles knew it well, reading Pound and
Eliot, Marianne Moore and Wallace Stevens. The In Zikh poets
were ready to play with incongruities of diction and sound; they
were contemptuous of the earlier wish of Di Yunge for
“concentrated and well-rounded form,” a wish, they felt, that
made poems into “at best ornaments, verbal decor.” In their open-
ing manifesto, as it appeared in a 1920 anthology called In Zikh,
they reiterated what by now seem standard notions of modernism:
“Form and content are one. A poem that can be paraphrased is not
a poem... . We believe that free verse is best suited for our in-
dividuality of rhythm, and that is why we prefer it... . For us there
does not exist the sterile question as to whether the poet should
write about national or social or personal problems.” All this is
familiar because once it was new. Yet, in retrospect, one can see
how this group had many elements of continuity with Di Yunge,
even if in the actual history of Yiddish poetry there were sharp
conflicts between the two.

After a few years the In Zikh poets went their separate ways.
Jacob Glatstein, who had been the literary spokesman of the group,
soon developed into one of the major Yiddish poets of the century,
a writer of great intellectual force and verbal dexterity, who
spanned the distance from the youthful bravura of the twenties to
the renewed employment of Jewish themes characteristic of the
post-Holocaust years.

It was in Poland, however, that secular Jewish culture flourished
most strongly during the years between the two world wars. War-
saw became a mecca for young Yiddish writers. The kleynkunst
bine, or chamber theater, encouraged freewheeling satire and pop-
ular poetry. The Association of Jewish Writers and the Association
of Jewish Actors were both active and lively. To be a Yiddish writer
in Warsaw, said the poet Melech Ravitch soon after arriving there,
