Introduction 39

was “’to feel the redemption at hand and to be at its center.” In such
other centers of Jewish life as Vilna and Lodz, Yiddish literature,
theater, and scholarship also blazed with talent. Trends toward as-
similation were already visible, though a great many Polish Jews
still spoke Yiddish. But while assimilation was encouraged in the
other two great centers of interwar Jewry—by Communist policies
in the Soviet Union and by the integrationist outlook prevailing in
the United States—it was impeded in Poland by the xenophobic
character of Polish nationalism. All too often this nationalism ex-
pressed itself in overt anti-Semitism and a resistance to intellectual
pluralism. Only in Poland, during the years between the world
wars, were the Jews forced inward rather than pressured or enabled
to move outward.

Despite their material poverty, the life of these Jews was rich in
culture—rich in publications, books, magazines, daily newspapers,
institutions, and individual talents. And since Warsaw was a center
of secular Jewish politics, especially that of the socialist Bund, the
city steadily provided a large and eager public for the Yiddish
writers. Here the hope of maintaining Yiddish as a distinctive
culture found its last strong expression.

In the Polish Jewish community of the 1920s there sprang up a
number of literary groups. Two of them have been mentioned: Di
Khaliastre (The Gang), which appeared in Warsaw in 1922, and
Yung Vilne, which began to assert itself seven years later. Both
groups encouraged poetic talents, though not many of the poets
who came under their influence upheld for long their aesthetic
declarations.

“We young ones, a happy song-filled gang,” reads the opening
passage from a poem on the first page of Di Khaliastre, ‘‘we take
an unmarked path, / In these deeply fearful days / In nights of
fright / Per aspera ad astra!” The group held together for just one
year, after which its main figures went off along widely different
paths: Perets Markish to western Europe and then back to the
Soviet “homeland,” Uri Tsvi Greenberg to Berlin and then to
Palestine and a place of honor in Hebrew poetry. Only Melech
Ravitch stayed for a time in Warsaw, beginning his life as a Yid-
dish wanderer across the globe in the thirties.

Di Khaliastre was aggressive, impudent, playful, a Jewish ver-
sion of the expressionist temper sweeping European literature after
