 

40 Introduction

the First World War. These young poets delighted in affronting
conventional Jewish sensibilities, whether religious or secular, con-
servative or radical, bourgeois or proletarian. Employing disjointed
syntax, ejaculatory phrases, free rhythms, surrealistic images,
erotic allusions, and, sometimes, leftist war cries, Di Khaliastre
proclaimed, “Our standard is not the beautiful, but the horrible.”
Some of this was mere hijinks, some a serious engagement with the
chaos of postwar European life.

Yung Vilne was different. Coming together at the time of the
great depression, this group of writers in and near Vilna, long a
great center of Jewish learning, assumed a more solemn tone and
concerned itself more directly with social issues. As it proposed to
“march into Yiddish literature’ (in those days no one would mere-
ly walk), Yung Vilne managed to combine a strongly rooted con-
nection to Jewish life and thought with an ardent political leftism.
This was the first Yiddish literary group whose members—or most
of them—were educated in modern Jewish culture. They studied
Yiddish and Hebrew writers like Mendele, Perets, and Bialik in the
Yiddish and Hebrew Vilna schools. They wrote Yiddish easily and
naturally, with a sense of a modern literary tradition of their own.
A number of talented young poets—Chaim Grade, Leyzer Volf,
Abraham Sutzkever—began to write under the auspices of Yung
Vilne: poets quite different in temperament and style but bound
together by a common feeling of historical crisis. Leyzer Volf wrote
grotesque expressionist lyrics; Chaim Grade began with poems of
social protest but soon transformed himself into a significant
national poet, drawing upon his yeshive experience and erudition;
Abraham Sutzkever started as a poet not at all inclined to political
outcries, preferring instead virtuoso play with the Yiddish
language and writing about physical textures and exotica. Here,
too, time and history would do their work, driving many of these
writers to death or dispersion.

These literary groups by no means exhaust—they barely begin
to comprehend—the diversity of Yiddish literary life in Poland
between 1919 and 1939. In two decades, gifted poets appeared who
had no interest in any group or school, writing out of individual
sensibilities and visions. Aaron Zeitlin would remain, both in
Poland and after his emigration to the United States, one of the few
Yiddish poets standing fast by religious faith. Itsik Manger, com-
