Introduction 41

ing from Rumania to Poland in 1929, won the hearts of the Yiddish
public with poems featuring a playful transfer of biblical figures to
the east European shtetl and their reduction from the legendary to
an all-too-human condition. Though sometimes wearing the mask
of folk entertainer and often employing meters close to those of the
folk song, Manger was a canny artist who charmingly blended
melancholy and lighthearted strains. And there were others, too,
many others, lost to us through the terribleness of this century.

The years after the Holocaust were a time of shock, anguish,
bewilderment, and hesitant efforts at reorientation. In eastern
Europe—Poland, Rumania, Lithuania—Yiddish culture was
destroyed. In the Soviet Union there remained, after the murders of
1952, only a pitiful remnant. A number of Yiddish writers reached
Israel, where they managed to establish themselves, if only
marginally. Under the editorship of Abraham Sutzkever an
impressive literary quarterly in Yiddish, Di Goldene Keyt (The
Golden Chain) began to appear in 1948 in Tel Aviv. In the United
States, with its substantial though shrinking Yiddish public, there
were a few concluding decades of brilliance for Yiddish poetry.
It was only to be expected that after the Holocaust the various
modernist sensibilities and styles should be put aside—perhaps as
triviality, perhaps as luxury—and that the remaining Yiddish
writers should struggle to achieve what they must have known was
impossible: to find some way of registering and coping with the
horrors of their moment. In Yiddish as in other languages there
were voices urging that only silence could be an appropriate
response—a contradiction in terms, perhaps, but an under-
standable one. Those voices that were raised in poetry dealt with
the Holocaust along a spectrum ranging from hushed lamentation
to strident outcries. Some turned back to a God of mysterious
ways, not to be denied or perhaps even questioned, after the world
had drowned in blood. ‘‘Can I then choose not to believe,” asked
Aaron Zeitlin, “in that living God... / Who having turned my
body to fine ash / begins once more to wake me?” Some proposed
sardonically to break off: 00 God of Mercy,” wrote Kadya
Molodovsky, “For the time being / Choose another people” (page
330). And some saw God as forlorn and helpless, quite like his
