 

42 Introduction

people: “I love my sorrowful God, my wandering brother,’’ wrote
Jacob Glatstein, “And here he sits with me, my friend, clasping
me / And sharing his last bite with me.”

No writer could say what an appropriate literary response to the
Holocaust might be, or whether literature was even capable of
making it. The best poems—and the poets were luckier than the
writers of fiction in that they did not have to cope with the problem
of representing the Holocaust—were those which took the form of
personal stammering, oblique, perhaps obscure, resting with
neither doctrine nor opinion. The two major Yiddish poets of these
years—Abraham Sutzkever in Israel and Jacob Glatstein in New
York—approached the problem in different ways. Sutzkever, who
had survived the Holocaust in Vilna, kept moving from past to
present, nightmare to possible renewal, memory haunted and in-
tolerable to the fields and streets of Israel. Glatstein wrote a
remarkable group of Holocaust poems, always at a tangent, graz-
ing the incomprehensibility of evil.

As the years went on, it became clear that the pressures of
twentieth-century history, both malign and benign, had done their
work. Yiddish writers kept passing from the scene. Younger
replacements seldom appeared. The Yiddish era in Jewish history
was reaching its end, and with it the moment of Yiddish poetry.

A Poetry of Homelessness

Yiddish poetry is a poetry of homelessness and dislocation. It is
shaped, and sometimes misshaped, by pent-up yearnings for
definition, security, free space, and even a bit of repose, One of its
functions is to cast about, directly or obliquely, for new surrogate
homes, even utopian enclaves—all of them places of the imagina-
tion in which a people may re-create itself as it enters the modern
world. There is an eagerness, at this moment of Jewish history, to
break away and get moving, though toward what and where is by
no means always clear to those who harbor it. And Yiddish poetry
often assumes the “task” of expressing this eagerness, though
sometimes also of criticizing and mocking it.

The poets face this task in different ways. Some succumb to
programmatic declamation, and theirs is usually the work that
