Introduction 43

wears least well. Some turn to exercises in nostalgia, which, in the
last analysis, represents a stratagem for breaking from the past.
Some try to chart new modes of experience and sensibility for their
readers and themselves, often through improvisations of per-
sonality. Some express a hunger for those little pleasures of or-
dinary life that other peoples enjoy as a matter of course—and this
too, in its own way, reflects the inner turmoil of Jewish life. The
one thing that can be said with some certainty is that in Yiddish
writing, even that of the self-declared aesthetes, the shadow of
history falls heavily.

In the decades between the late nineteenth century and the
Holocaust, the Jewish experience in Europe represents, predom-
inantly, a forced, sometimes ragged march toward modernity.
There are segments of the Jewish community who resist this turn,
usually remaining under the protective canopy of traditional belief.
When we look at the efforts to create a secular Yiddish culture in
eastern Europe and the United States, we must be repeatedly struck
by the straining to break loose from the Jewish past, but without
wholly abandoning it—indeed, the straining to break loose from
the past while often cherishing it. Much of this is anticipatory,
mental, a visionary preparation for new modes of life by no means
clearly grasped or securely in hand. There is a tearing apart of
that long-established, organic Jewish community, which by the
nineteenth century had itself started visibly to disintegrate. There
is a willing or fantasizing of both individual and collective libera-
tion, with plenty of quarreling over its terms. Yet the circumstances
of daily life continue to be constricted and dark, so that Yiddish
literature, especially its poetry, has to bear a heavy burden of un-
fulfilled aspirations. The literature is young and frail, though
abundant in talent; and the culture out of which it emerges makes
enormous demands upon its writers: Speak for us, guide us in our
spiritual wanderings, create new values that can sustain us during
this perilous Jewish moment.

Without a physical territory, without the protection of nation-
hood, without the ripeness of culture that only a long and free
development makes possible, Yiddish literature races ahead
—races, so to say, even ahead of itself—with a bravado that often
must veil weaknesses and vulnerabilities. The idea of a self-suffi-
cient secular Yiddish culture, wedged between the overpowering
