 

 

44 Introduction

presences of the Hebraic past and the Western present, proves to
be inherently fragile—proves, we may even say, impossible to
maintain for any extended length of time. The closer a secular Yid-
dish culture comes to achieving its own fulfillment, the closer it
comes to preparing its own destruction. For soon enough fulfill-
ment brings it to the very borders of Western or non-Jewish
modernity, and the prospect of crossing these is one that Yiddish
writers find almost equally attractive and alarming.

The role of imaginative literature, deprived by traditional
Judaism of any independent value, grows among the east European
Jews to the extent that they establish closer relations with sur-
rounding cultures. Writers fill, in part, the spiritual vacuum left by
the decline of rabbinic authority. Aestheticism, at first a challenge
to traditional Jewish authority, soon becomes a still greater chal-
lenge to newly emancipated Jews who turn to literature for social
and ethical illumination, a new “guide to the perplexed.” By in-
sisting on sensibility rather than traditional authority as the
ultimate arbiter of value, the Yiddish poets come almost to defy
their culture entirely, in both its religious and secular forms.

The sense of entering a moment of perilous transition gives the
whole of Jewish life a strong vibration of anxiety and excitement.
Crudely or subtly, this vibration can be heard throughout Yiddish
poetry. Mani Leyb’s stubborn, wistful devotion to the idea of a
pure poetry; Moyshe Kulbak’s poetic reconstructions of the strong
village Jews of eastern Europe, so different from common
stereotypes of the pale, bent figures of the shtetl; Itsik Manger’s
vignettes of biblical figures reduced to life size; Moyshe-Leyb
Halpern’s sardonic excoriations of the immigrant Jewish milieu in
America; Kadya Molodovsky’s impassioned lyrics in which the
voice of the Jewish woman breaks out—all these, on one level, are
exactly what they seem to be, the work of highly individual Yid-
dish poets. But they are also reflections of a deep restlessness of
spirit that spreads through Jewish life in the nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries. Even in the poems of such quiet writers as
Y. ¥. Segal and Joseph Rolnik, who are rarely tempted by ideo-
logical bombast and almost always content to portray one or
another moment of fleeting existence, there is a note of urgency
which the reader trained in Yiddish easily detects. For the tranquil-
lity of such poets, like the tranquillity of Mani Leyb in the lovely
