Introduction 45

sonnets he wrote toward the end of his life, is at least as much a
condition yearned for as a condition achieved. Little in Yiddish
literature, little in Jewish life, is finally at ease with itself, at rest
with the sheer savor of being. Even when we take pleasure in the
variety and range of Yiddish poetic voices, we still hear in them a
murmuring undervoice, grave and anxious.

To read Yiddish literature one must know something about the
passions and the clatter of the Jewish world; but finally it is the
voices of the poets themselves that matter, the voices, rich and
various, of Mani Leyb and Markish, of Halpern and Leivick, of
Manger and Kulbak, of Shtoltsenberg and Margolin, of Glatstein
and Sutzkever.

The Yiddish poets came upon the literary scene—more accurate-
ly, they had first to improvise one for themselves—uncertain of
where or who their audience might be. That is one reason they
tended to form groups: it brought comfort and warmth. (“We are a
sect,” wrote H. Leivick of Di Yunge. ‘We set ourselves apart from
everyone.) There were plenty of people who could read Yiddish,
but there were not many trained or experienced readers of modern
Yiddish literature. And the more the poets ventured onto the unex-
plored terrain of modernism, the less could they expect the com-
munal favor which had been the privilege of such earlier writers as
Mendele and Sholem Aleichem. No sooner did Yiddish poetry
break from folk constraints and ideological formulas than it
became a poetry mainly of the little magazine and for the elite
audience—not so very different from the fate of poets in Western
countries,

Starting to write mainly in the first decades of this century, the
Yiddish poets enjoyed—though they were also often overwhelmed
by—a bewildering range of literary options. They could draw upon
the incomparable Hebraic traditions; they had at hand materials
from Yiddish folk culture; they began to emulate and learn from
the virtuosities of European romanticism, symbolism, and modern-
ism. There was so much in the way of usable resources they could
turn to that finally, at least for some of the poets, there was rather
little they could actually take possession of.

Many Yiddish poets, especially in the first two or three decades
of the century, were attracted to the styles and tones of roman-
ticism. By now we may feel that romanticism in poetry, like realism
