 

46 Introduction

in fiction, has become exhausted and stale. One reason for this feel-
ing is surely that in the lives of all of us romanticism has been so
enveloping an influence. But for the Yiddish poets beginning to
write some seventy years ago, whether in New York or Kiev or
Warsaw, romanticism still seemed fresh, even revolutionary, in
both its literary and nonliterary aspects. Romanticism signified for
them uncharted territories of individual experience; it opened up
the psychology of the self; it beckoned with alluring new reper-
toires of sensation. Romanticism may have been visibly decaying
in Europe, but for Yiddish poets just starting to write, it
represented possibilities for assertion, individuality, rebellion. It
meant taking over literary modes, forms, and styles from Pushkin,
Heine, Baudelaire. It meant stretching out a hand to, perhaps even
shyly hoping for a pact with, the writers of Europe. It meant enter-
ing the outer world.

If we now are inclined to say that Yiddish poetry offers rather
little in the way of formal experimentation, we should remember
that such a statement can be made only from a distance. But if we
see Yiddish poetry as an outgrowth of its own culture, then the
familiar styles and forms of romanticism clearly represent
something radically new—the domestication of elements borrowed
from Western literature.

If there is little formal innovation within Yiddish poetry, there is
a great deal of play with language. Yiddish poetry comes to its
language not as a finished reality but as a range of untested pos-
sibilities. This enables Yiddish poets to improvise new verbal
forms, to twist words and phrases into new compounds and forma-
tions, with a freedom that few writers in the established Western
languages can match. The process of “creating’’ a literary
language, which in English has taken centuries, is here pressed into
a few decades. Refining diction, inventing neologisms, banishing
alien vocabularies, settling (and then overturning) syntax—all this
occurs at the very moment that the major Yiddish works are being
composed.

There is a constant straining among Yiddish poets to break past
customary limitations of subject matter. Individual poets rebel
against the tyranny of collective themes. “The older Yiddish poet
knows no moods,” wrote Reuven Ayzland, theoretician of Di
Yunge, ‘because he has never penetrated his own personal self.
