Introduction 7

And even when he does turn inward he has a ready-made
generalized formula for everything.” By the early years of the cen-
tury the younger Yiddish poets are proudly asserting their own
voices, moods, temperaments, styles; they insist upon shaking off
the burdens of the folk in order to sing and speak as solitaries.
Indeed, some of the Yiddish poets make this a major theme of their
work, quite as the problem of poetry becomes a major theme in
modern American and European poetry. That finally this testifies
to the power and persistence of collective Jewish fate is perhaps the
central irony in the development of Yiddish poetry. Always, the
rhythm of flight and return: toward the lure of personal speech
and back to the web of Jewish destiny. Weak poets succumb to the
tension of this movement back and forth; strong poets make it into
the very substance of their work.

It remains only to say a few words regarding the grounds on which
we made our selection of poets, as well as the policies we tried to
follow in translating. No one quite knows the number of writers
who have tried their hand at Yiddish poetry. Of the hundreds
whose work is known, it can safely be said that a few score have
done work good enough to merit translation. Yet we have included
in this volume only thirty-nine poets, first because of the obvious
pressure of space and second because we felt that if the quality of a
poet’s work were to be glimpsed in translation, that would require
us to use at least several of his or her poems.

Yiddish readers will no doubt be unhappy about some of our
omissions—so are we. But we can only say that in some instances,
especially with regard to the once-popular poets of the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries who stressed social and
national themes, even the most loyal translations seem likely to
betray the spirit of the originals. The historical context, the
sustaining atmosphere in which these poets wrote, is no longer
here, and without that context and atmosphere their work cannot
breathe. (Legal reasons determined some omissions.)

We have chosen to give the most space to six Yiddish poets,
those who seem to us the strongest, the most characteristic, and the
most accessible in translation. Moyshe-Leyb Halpern is perhaps
the most original and tumultuous voice in Yiddish poetry, at once
