 

48 Introduction

brilliantly comic and sad in rendering the “‘lostness” of immigrant
Jewish life. His outspoken distaste for the “‘alrightniks’” who were
scrambling up the ladder of American opportunity made him
something of a public conscience in the immigrant world, though
his poetry grew so complex and personal that his later work (which
includes the poems toward the end of our selection) was almost in-
accessible to the ordinary Yiddish reader. Itsik Manger played the
part of folk bard, a choice signaled even by his use of the
diminutive “Ttsik’’ over the formal name “Yitskhok.” A notorious
inebriate, Manger did not stay in one place or with one publication
for very long, preferring, instead, to cultivate a vagabond air. Still,
his lyrics are wonderfully crafted and owe as much to sophisticated
European poetic traditions as to the Yiddish folk song. Moyshe
Kulbak, an extremely versatile poet cut off in his middle years by
the Stalinist terror, wrote both about old-country village life and
cosmopolitan deracination in the Europe of the 1920s; for reasons
of space, our selection features the former aspect of his work.
Perets Markish, the major figure in Soviet Yiddish poetry, was a
rebellious expressionist who took the Russian Revolution as a basic
metaphor for Yiddish verse, writing with equal passion of its blood
and hope, of the collapse and destruction of old Jewish com-
munities and the new expectations of freedom. Later, under
hardening Soviet censorship, Markish’s poetry turned reflective
and opaque. But in his final work, like the poem “Shards” (page
376), his boldness reemerges, now directed toward a harsh sum-
mary of his own experience. Jacob Glatstein not only played a
leading part in bringing the modernist impulse into Yiddish poetry
but through his sharp intelligence and technical virtuosity wrote
powerfully in a great many poetic modes. And Abraham Sutzkever
in his remarkable career—it spans a childhood in Siberia, the
ordeal of the Holocaust in Vilna, and later residence in Israel—em-
bodies a central line of modern Jewish experience. The only one of
these six poets still alive, he is a master of Yiddish versification and
linguistic play.

Our intention has been to present translations that are both
faithful to the original Yiddish and constitute English poems in
their own right—obviously a difficult task, and at times an impos-
