Introduction 49

sible one. There are serious literary people who believe that the
only authentic mode of translation is to make a strictly literal ver-
sion, which means, of course, losing the poetry of the poem. There
are serious literary people who believe that the only way to evoke
in translation at least part of the poem’s original quality is to take
liberties with language and structure, which means, of course, to
risk losing whatever is paraphrasable from the meaning of the
original poem. Our own desire, very hard to realize, has been to
avoid both these extremes and try for an English poem reasonably
close in meaning to the original while also somewhat like it in
poetic effect.

No matter which approach one takes to translation, losses are in-
evitable. Losses are especially likely when translating from Yid-
dish, not because there is some mysterious essence to Yiddish that
makes translation from Yiddish more difficult than from other
languages, but because Yiddish literature contains a heavy weight
of historical references, cultural assumptions, and religious sym-
bols that may not be familiar to the contemporary reader, especially
one raised in the Christian cultural heritage. In such instances we
have provided short notes, which appear at the foot of the trans-
lations. In other instances, however, we have had to decide that
certain important Yiddish poems could not be adequately trans-
lated, so freighted are they with internal references.

There are other problems—all too many of them—with regard
to translating Yiddish poetry. An especially recalcitrant aspect of
Yiddish poetry is that it often approaches a state of bilingualism,
with Hebraisms, quotations, and allusions drawn from the Bible
and other traditional Jewish sources used by poets for a wide range
of effects, from a heightening of tone to an undercurrent of irony.
There are times when even the greatest verbal dexterity cannot
cope with this problem.

The most common difficulty in translating has to do with
choosing between faithfulness to paraphrasable meaning and
faithfulness to structure, form, rhythm, diction, and the like. Such
choices seemed best left to the individual translators as they strug-
gled with each poem. Some translators have chosen to follow the
rhyme scheme of the original or at least part of it; other translators
have felt they could best capture the quality of the original by
dropping rhyme and thereby gaining more flexibility of diction
