176 Moyshe-Leyb Halpern

Perets (1852-1915), whose poem “‘Monish” appears on page 52, was a
dominant figure of modern Yiddish literature. His death in Warsaw, on
April 3, 1915, at the beginning of the First World War, seemed to mark the
end of an era and elicited the greatest expression of public mourning until
then given a modern Jewish writer. It has been suggested that this poem is
an anti-Kaddish: in contrast to the traditional prayer of mourning, it
never mentions God’s name, it condemns the Jews, and it reflects on
impending death instead of resurrection.

L. 21: “that great hero... thirty shekels to the world”: Twisting the
anti-Semitic stereotype, the poem cites Jacob’s shrewd purchase of the
birthright from Esau, and Judas's betrayal of Jesus for thirty pieces of
silver as proof of the unbridled Jewish mercantile spirit. The final part of
the poem seems to echo the anguished questions of the Book of Job, ad-
dressed here not to God but to Perets, the great “dead lion.”

Yitskhok Leybush Perets

And you're dead. And you've not yet been covered by the ground;
Far through a thousand streets like horses galloping round,
Young and old newsboys spread, rushing about their business,
Hawking papers through which, with telegraphic swiftness,
We know now that your heart’s not beating anymore.

Here, splashed as in a great advertisement, is your

Gray head, black-framed. We Important Persons, who, at most
Should be prostrate and dumb, now ring around your ghost,
As in a bar some rich old drunk’s encircled by girls.

And we have tears and words as round and smooth as pearls,
As large around as coins. And everyone with a tongue

Inside his head now beats out, like a shoemaker’s young
Apprentice, hammering away at a heavy nail

In an old shoe's heel, pounds out a rhythmic dirge, a wail.
Every sound is full of dirt, of the smell of sweat

Like a black skin; and everything’s just merchandise. Hell! Yet
We'll deal in everything that sells, of every sort,

In Torahs and pigs’ bristles, in men and devil’s dirt.

Indeed, it’s a wonder that all this time we haven't been
Cheating Death of his sickle for pennies and some gin.

But then, we’re flesh and blood of that great hero who
Bought, for a mess of pottage, a birthright; and then, too,
