 

178 Moyshe-Leyb Halpern

One of our number—a god as large as life, they say—
Was sold for thirty shekels to the world. Today,

Then, all this information being strictly true,

Indeed, why after all should we not trade in you?

Dust of our pride—what were you? A log not all burned up
Glowing in a gypsy camp at night out on the steppe;

The sail of a ship that wrestles with the wind and sea;

In a wandering wood bewitched, the last standing tree
Where lightning felled great oaks a thousand winters old,
Cut down at the roots. What are you now? On the cold
Ground, a silent man motionless as if penned

In marble by the death candle. A beginning-end.

An image—a glimpsed, momentary image now of it,

That long sleep taking day and night from us, a bit

OF life with all the world’s beauty. Can this, then, be
Peace? this, our dark journey’s dream of eternity?

Why does man fall prostrate at thoughts of death and moan
Like a child crying, out in the dark night alone?

Who orders spring to flower and fade? Who guides the world?
Who on autumn days, through wild and forest, has hurled
The wind? And when the fallen eagle no longer flies,
Why must there be a raven to rip out both his eyes?

Why can a fearless hand touch the dead lion? Why

Does not the regal soul of the lion pour forth a cry

From the flayed hide? Forgive my asking all this. Forgive.
But what else can I do? I, too, love to live.

And I have eyes

And I have eyes, yes; open eyes. And I am blind.

And I am the child only of a common kind

Of grocer. And like a clod of withered earth that quite
Longs for rain, I long to be bathed in your light.

And like the poor man’s hands, trembling at the bread,

I want the sight of your averted spirit. The dead

OF you, the night of you, is all I now can see:

This wasteland, with you gone, is emptier for me.

Blessed is he for whom there is a world to come:

There can be no such solace for me. Yet one more tomb—
Mine—will sink below the ground, and yet one more
Death candle—mine—will end in smoke; and as before
