Grateful acknowledgment is made for permission to reprint the following copyrighted
material:

“The Sweatshop,” by Morris Rosenfeld; “Household of Eight,” by Abraham Reisen;
“Hush” and “I Am .. .,” by Mani Leyb; “The Bird” and “The Will,” by Moyshe-Leyb
Halpern; “The Night Is Dark,” “On the Roads of Siberia,” and “Sanitorium,” by H. Leivick;
“Isaiah and Homer,” by Aaron Glants-Leyeles; “White Night,” by Kadya Molodovsky;
“Vilna,” by Moyshe Kulbak; “From ‘Kleine Nachtmusik’ “” and “Wagons,” by Jacob
Glatstein; “To Be a Jew,” by Aaron Zeitlin; “So what if I’ve been circumcised . . .” and “I've
Never Been Lost,’ by Itsik Fefer; and “Bolsheviks,” by Aba Shtoltsenberg, are from
A Treasury of Yiddish Poetry, edited by Irving Howe and Eliezer Greenberg. Copyright
© 1969 by Irving Howe and Eliezer Greenberg. Reprinted by permission of Henry Holt
and Company.

The following works are reprinted in their original Yiddish text and translated into English
by arrangement with their respective proprietors:

All poems by Moyshe-Leyb Halpern with the exception of “The Bird” and “The Will.” By
permission of Isaac Halpern.

“A Stubborn Back—And Nothing More” and “Sacrifice,” by H. Leivick. By permission of
Ida B. Leivick.

All poems by Celia Dropkin. By permission of John Dropkin.

“Fabius Lind’s Days,” “Bolted Room,” and “Disorder,” by Aaron Glants-Leyeles. By per-
mission of Dena Levitt.

All poems by Melech Ravitch. By permission of Yost Bergner.
All poems by Yankev-Yitskhok Segal. By permission of Mrs. Yankev-Yitskhok Segal.

All poems by Jacob Glatstein with the exception of “From ‘Kleine Nachtmusik’ ” and
“Wagons.” By permission of Fanny Gladstone.

Selections from “Mephisto,” “In the Kingdom of the Cross,” and “King Shabtai Tsvi,” by
Uri Tsvi Greenberg. By permission of Acum Ltd. All rights for the original Yiddish verse
are reserved by the author.

All poems by Malka Heifetz Tussman. By permission of the author.

All poems by Gabriel Preil. By permission of the author.

All poems by Yankev Fridman. By permission of Kenia Friedman.

All poems by Abraham Sutzkever. By permission of the author.

“The Circus Dancer,” “Adam,” and “The Filth of Your Suspicion,” by Celia Dropkin, and

“Epilogue,” “This Evening,” “The Strikover Rabbi,” and “The Little Pig,” by Zishe Landau,
first appeared in Translation.
