 

 

 

 

 

FOR THE BEST IN PAPERBACKS, LOOK FOR THE

In every corner of the world, on every subject under the sun, Penguin
represents quality and variety—the very best in publishing today.

For complete information about books available from Penguin—
including Pelicans, Puffins, Peregrines, and Penguin Classics—and
how to order them, write to us at the appropriate address below. Please
note that for copyright reasons the selection of books varies from
country to country.

In the United Kingdom: For a complete list of books available from Penguin in
the U.K., please write to Dept E.P., Penguin Books Ltd, Harmondsworth,
Middlesex, UB7 ODA.

In the United States: For a complete list of books available from Penguin in
the U.S., please write to Dept BA, Penguin, 299 Murray Hill Parkway, East
Rutherford, New Jersey 07073.

In Canada: For a complete list of books available from Penguin in Canada,
please write to Penguin Books Canada Ltd, 2801 John Street, Markham, Ontario
138 84

In Australia: For a complete list of books available from Penguin in Australia,
please write to the Marketing Department, Penguin Books Australia Lid, P.O.
Box 257, Ringwood, Victoria 3134.

In New Zealand: For a complete list of books available from Penguin in New
Zealand, please write to the Marketing Department, Penguin Books (NZ) Lid,
Private Bag, Takapuna, Auckland 9.

In India: For a complete list of books available from Penguin, please write to
Penguin Overseas Lid, 706 Eros Apartments, 56 Nehru Place, New Dethi,
110019.

In Holland: For a complete list of books available from Penguin in Holland,
please write to Penguin Books Nederland B.V., Postbus 195, NL-1380AD Weesp,
Netherlands.

In Germany: Fora complete list of books available from Penguin, please write to
Penguin Books Ltd, Friedrichstrasse 10-12, D-6000 Frankfurt Main 1, Federal
Republic of Germany.

In Spain: For a complete list of books available from Penguin in Spain, please
write to Longman Penguin Espafia, Calle San Nicolas 15, E~28013 Madrid,
Spain.
